---
title: "Empirical Science Meets Higher-Order Views of Consciousness: Reply to Hakwan Lau and Richard Brown"
author: "Ned Block"
date: "2019"
source: "semantic_scholar"
url: "https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fa03841c11f318747211ef3e6ac13d469fa48a03"
citations: 11
---

## Abstract

—0 —+1 Much of the battle over firstorder versus higherorder theories of conscious experience concerns intuitions concerning the word “consciousness”—or more charitably, the concept of consciousness. Firstorder perceptual repre sen ta tions are repre sen ta tions of the world, whereas higherorder repre sen ta tions are repre sen ta tions of one’s represen ta tions, including but not limited to firstorder repre sen ta tions. Firstorder theories of the sort I advocate locate conscious perception in interacting repre sen ta tions of the world and perhaps interactions between repre sen ta tions of the world and subcortical activations that do not represent anything. Advocates of higherorder theories focus on the founding intuition that a state that one is in no way conscious of being in is not a conscious state. In recent years, I have suggested that firstorder theories can accommodate this intuition via a sameorder account in which conscious states include a kind of awareness of themselves. I have also taken seriously the idea that the founding intuition is too superficial to give us any insight. We say that a song is something one sings, that a dance is something one dances, and a jump is something one jumps. These relations are superficial in that they do not provide any substantive insight into what singing, dancing, or jumping is. Similarly, saying a conscious state is one we are conscious of is a superficial relation. In some past writings I have focused on a bizarre feature of higherorder views, such as those of Rosenthal (2005) and Weisberg (2010), in which a conscious visual experience as of the green color of the grass on my lawn can occur without any firstorder visual repre sen ta tion of the green color of the grass (Block 2011a, 2011b). These authors are forced into this position by consideration of cases in which firstorder and higherorder repre sen ta tions disagree and cases in which there are no firstorder represen ta tions for the higherorder repre sen ta tions to be about. I have found discussions on this topic rather unproductive— even more so than most intuitionbased disagreements in philosophy. So I welcome that Hakwan Lau and Richard Brown have focused their discussion on actual cases that raise genuine empirical issues. By discussion of these and other real cases, we stand a better chance of adjudicating between firstorder and higherorder theories. 12 Empirical Science Meets HigherOrder Views of Consciousness: Reply to Hakwan Lau and Richard Brown
