---
title: "2^n is exponential, but 2^50 is finite"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Sun, 22 Oct 2017"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=3512"
---

**Unrelated Update (Oct. 23)** I still feel bad that there was no time for public questions at my "Theoretically Speaking" talk in Berkeley, and also that the lecture hall was too small to accomodate a large fraction of the people who showed up. So, if you're someone who came there wanting to ask me something, go ahead and ask in the comments of this post.

* * *

During my whirlwind tour of the Bay Area, questions started pouring in about a preprint from a group mostly at IBM Yorktown Heights, entitled [Breaking the 49-Qubit Barrier in the Simulation of Quantum Circuits](https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.05867). In particular, does this paper make a mockery of everything the upcoming quantum supremacy experiments will try to achieve, and all the theorems about them that we've proved?

Following my usual practice, let me paste the abstract here, so that we have the authors' words in front of us, rather than what a friend of a friend said a popular article reported  _might_ have been in the paper.

With the current rate of progress in quantum computing technologies, 50-qubit systems will soon become a reality. To assess, refine and advance the design and control of these devices, one needs a means to test and evaluate their fidelity. This in turn requires the capability of computing ideal quantum state amplitudes for devices of such sizes and larger. In this study, we present a new approach for this task that significantly extends the boundaries of what can be classically computed. We demonstrate our method by presenting results obtained from a calculation of the complete set of output amplitudes of a universal random circuit with depth 27 in a 2D lattice of 7 × 7 qubits. We further present results obtained by calculating an arbitrarily selected slice of 237 amplitudes of a universal random circuit with depth 23 in a 2D lattice of 8×7 qubits. Such calculations were previously thought to be impossible due to impracticable memory requirements. Using the methods presented in this paper, the above simulations required 4.5 and 3.0 TB of memory, respectively, to store calculations, which is well within the limits of existing classical computers.

This is an excellent paper, which sets a new record for the classical simulation of generic quantum circuits; I congratulate the authors for it. Now, though, I want you to take a deep breath and repeat after me:

**This paper does not undercut the rationale for quantum supremacy experiments.** The truth, ironically, is almost the opposite: it being possible to simulate 49-qubit circuits using a classical computer is a  _precondition_ for Google's planned quantum supremacy experiment, because it's the only way we know to check such an experiment's results! The goal, with sampling-based quantum supremacy, was always to target the "sweet spot," which we estimated at around 50 qubits, where classical simulation is still possible, but it's clearly orders of magnitude more expensive than doing the experiment itself. If you like, the goal is to get as far as you can up the mountain of exponentiality, conditioned on people still being able to see you from the base. Why? Because you can. Because it's there. Because it challenges those who think quantum computing will never scale: _explain this, punks!_ But there's no point unless you can verify the result.

Related to that, **the paper does not refute any prediction I made** , by doing anything I claimed was impossible. On the contrary (if you must know), the paper confirms something that I predicted _would_ be possible. People said: "40 qubits is the practical limit of what you can simulate, so there's no point in Google or anyone else doing a supremacy experiment with 49 qubits, since they can never verify the results." I would shrug and say something like: "eh, if you can do 40 qubits, then I'm sure you can do 50. It's only a thousand times harder!"

So, how does the paper get up to 50 qubits? A lot of computing power and a lot of clever tricks, one of which (the irony thickens…) came from a paper that I recently coauthored with Lijie Chen: [Complexity-Theoretic Foundations of Quantum Supremacy Experiments](https://www.scottaaronson.com/papers/quantumsupre.pdf). Lijie and I were interested in the question: what's the best way to simulate a quantum circuit with n qubits and m gates? We noticed that there's a time/space tradeoff here: you could just store the entire amplitude vector in memory and update, which would take exp(n) memory but also "only" about exp(n) time. Or you could compute the amplitudes you cared about via Feynman sums (as in the proof of BQP⊆PSPACE), which takes only linear memory, but exp(m) time. If you imagine, let's say, n=50 and m=1000, then exp(n) might be practical if you're IBM or Google, but exp(m) is certainly not.

So then we raised the question: could one get the best of both worlds? That is, could one simulate such a quantum circuit using both linear memory and exp(n) time? And we showed that this is _almost_ possible: we gave an algorithm that uses linear memory and dO(n) time, where d is the circuit depth. Furthermore, the more memory it has available, the faster our algorithm will run--until, in the limit of exponential memory, it just _becomes_ the "store the whole amplitude vector" algorithm mentioned above. I'm not sure why this algorithm wasn't discovered earlier, especially since it basically just amounts to [Savitch's Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Savitch%27s_theorem) from complexity theory. In any case, though, the IBM group used this idea among others to take full advantage of the RAM it had available.

Let me make one final remark: this little episode **perfectly illustrates why theoretical computer scientists like to talk about polynomial vs. exponential rather than specific numbers.** If you keep your eyes on the asymptotic fundamentals, rather than every factor of 10 or 1000, then you're not constantly shocked by events, like a dog turning its head for every passing squirrel. Before you could simulate 40 qubits, now you can simulate 50. Maybe with more cleverness you could get to 60 or even 70. But … dude. The problem is still exponential time.

We saw the same "SQUIRREL! SQUIRREL!" reaction with the people who claimed that the [wonderful paper by Clifford and Clifford](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.01260) had undercut the rationale for BosonSampling experiments, by showing how to solve the problem in "merely" ~2n time rather than ~mn, where n is the number of photons and m is the number of modes. Of course, Arkhipov and I had never _claimed_ more than ~2n hardness for the problem, and Clifford and Clifford's important result had _justified_ our conservatism on that point, but, y'know … SQUIRREL!

More broadly, it seems to me that this dynamic constantly occurs in the applied cryptography world. OMIGOD a 128-bit hash function has been broken! Big news! OMIGOD a new, harder hash function has been designed! Bigger news! OMIGOD OMIGOD OMIGOD the new one was broken too!! All of it fully predictable once you realize that we're on the shores of an exponentially hard problem, and for some reason, refusing to go far enough out into the sea (i.e., pick large enough security parameters) that none of this back-and-forth would happen.

I apologize, sincerely, if I come off as too testy in this post. No doubt it's entirely the fault of a cognitive defect on my end, wherein ten separate people asking me about something get treated by my brain like a single person who still doesn't get it even after I've explained it ten times.
