---
title: "Airport idiocy"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Wed, 28 Nov 2018"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=3999"
---

On Sunday, I returned to Austin with Dana and the kids from Thanksgiving in Pennsylvania.  The good news is that I didn't get arrested this time, didn't mistake any tips for change, and didn't even miss the flight!  But I did experience two airports that changed decisively for the worse.

In Newark Terminal C--i.e., one of the most important terminals of one of the most important airports in the world--there's now a gigantic wing _without a single restaurant or concession stand_ that, quickly and for a sane price, serves the sort of food that a child (say) might plausibly want to eat.  No fast food, not even an Asian place with rice and teriyaki to go.  Just one upscale eatery after the next, with complicated artisanal foods at brain-exploding prices, and--crucially--_" servers" who won't even acknowledge or make eye contact with the customers_, because you have to do everything through a digital ordering system that gives you no idea how long the food might take to be ready, and whether your flight is going to board first.  The experience was like waking up in some sci-fi dystopia, where all the people have been removed from a familiar environment and replaced with glassy-eyed cyborgs.  And had we not thought to pack a few snacks with us, our kids would've starved.

Based on this and other recent experiences, I propose the following principle: if a customer's digitally-mediated order to your company is eventually going to need to get processed by a human being anyhow--a fallible human who could screw things up--and if you're less competent at designing user interfaces than Amazon (which means: _anyone other than Amazon_), then you _must_ make it easy for the customer to talk to one of the humans behind the curtain.  Besides making the customer happy, such a policy is good business, since when you _do_ screw things up due to miscommunications caused by poor user interfaces--and you will--it will be on you to fix things anyway, which will eat into your profit margin.  To take another example, besides Newark Terminal C, all these comments apply with 3000% force to the delivery service DoorDash.

Returning to airports, though: whichever geniuses ruined Terminal C at Newark are _amateurs_ compared to those in my adopted home city of Austin.  Austin-Bergstrom International Airport (ABIA) chose Thanksgiving break--i.e., the busiest travel time of the year--to roll out [a universally despised redesign](https://www.kxan.com/news/local/austin/pick-up-location-for-taxis-rideshares-changes-at-austin-airport/1607572688) where you now need to journey for an extra 5-10 minutes (or 15 with screaming kids in tow), up and down elevators and across three parking lots, to reach the place where taxis and Ubers are.  The previous system was that you simply walked out of the terminal, crossed one street, and the line of taxis was there.

Supposedly this is to "reduce congestion" … except that, compared to other airports, ABIA _never  had_ any significant congestion caused by taxis.  I'd typically be the only person walking to them at a given time, or I'd join a line of just 3 or 4 people.  Nor does this do anything for the environment, since the city of Austin has no magical alternative, no subway or monorail to whisk you from the airport to downtown.  Just as many people will need a taxi or Uber as before; the only difference is that they'll need to go ten times further out of their way as they'd need to go at a ten times busier airport.  For new visitors, this means their first experience of Austin will be one of confusion and anger; for Austin residents who fly a few times per month, it means that days or weeks have been erased from their lives.  From the conversations I've had so far, it appears that every single passenger of ABIA, _and_ every single taxi and Uber driver, is livid about the change.  With one boneheaded decision, ABIA singlehandedly made Austin a less attractive place to live and work.

_Postscript I._   But if you're a prospective grad student, postdoc, or faculty member, you should still come to UT!  The death of reason, and the triumph of the blank-faced bureaucrats, is a worldwide problem, not something in any way unique to Austin.

_Postscript II._   No, I don't harbor any illusions that posts like this, or anything else I can realistically say or do, will change anything for the better, at my local airport _let alone_ in the wider world.  Indeed, I sometimes wonder whether, for the bureaucrats, the _point_  of ruining facilities and services that thousands rely on is precisely to grind down people's sense of autonomy, to make them realize the futility of argument and protest.  Even so, if someone responsible for the doofus decisions in question happened to come across this post, and if they felt even the tiniest twinge of fear or guilt, felt like their victory over common sense wouldn't be _quite_ as easy or painless as they'd hoped--well, that would be reason enough for the post.
