---
title: "Book Review: ‘The AI Does Not Hate You’ by Tom Chivers"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Mon, 07 Oct 2019"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=4361"
---

A couple weeks ago I read [The AI Does Not Hate You: Superintelligence, Rationality, and the Race to Save the World](https://www.amazon.com/Rationalists-Artificial-Intelligence-Geeks-World/dp/1474608779/ref=tmm_hrd_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=&sr=), the first-ever book-length examination of the modern [rationalist community](https://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Rationalist_movement), by British journalist [Tom Chivers](https://twitter.com/TomChivers?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor). I was planning to review it here, before it got preempted by the news of [quantum supremacy](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=4317) (and subsequent news of [classical non-supremacy](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=4342)). Now I can get back to rationalists.

Briefly, I think the book is a triumph. It's based around in-person conversations with many of the notable figures in and around the rationalist community, in its Bay Area epicenter and beyond (although apparently [Eliezer Yudkowsky](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eliezer_Yudkowsky) only agreed to answer technical questions by Skype), together of course with the voluminous material available online. There's a good deal about the 1990s origins of the community that I hadn't previously known.

The title is taken from Eliezer's aphorism, "The AI does not hate you, nor does it love you, but you are made of atoms which it can use for something else." In other words: as soon as anyone succeeds in building a superhuman AI, if we don't take extreme care that the AI's values are "aligned" with human ones, the AI might be expected to obliterate humans almost instantly as a byproduct of pursuing whatever it _does_ value, more-or-less as we humans did with woolly mammoths, moas, and now gorillas, rhinos, and thousands of other species.

Much of the book relates Chivers's personal quest to figure out how seriously he should take this scenario. Are the rationalists just an unusually nerdy doomsday cult? Is there some non-negligible chance that they're actually right about the AI thing? If so, how much more time do we have--and is there even anything meaningful that can be done today? Do the dramatic advances in machine learning over the past decade change the outlook? Should Chivers be worried about his own two children? How does this risk compare to the more "prosaic" civilizational risks, like climate change or nuclear war? I suspect that Chivers's exploration will be most interesting to readers who, like me, regard the answers to _none_ of these questions as obvious.

While it sounds extremely basic, what makes _The AI Does Not Hate You_ so valuable to my mind is that, as far as I know, it's nearly the only examination of the rationalists ever written by an outsider that tries to assess the ideas on a scale from true to false, rather than from quirky to offensive. Chivers's own training in academic philosophy seems to have been crucial here. He's not put off by people who act weirdly around him, even needlessly cold or aloof, nor by utilitarian thought experiments involving death or torture or weighing the value of human lives. He just cares, relentlessly, about the ideas--and about remaining a basically grounded and decent person while engaging them. Most strikingly, Chivers clearly feels a need--anachronistic though it seems in 2019--actually to _understand_ complicated arguments, be able to repeat them back correctly, before he attacks them.

Indeed, far from failing to understand the rationalists, it occurs to me that the central criticism of Chivers's book is likely to be just the opposite: he understands the rationalists so well, extends them so much sympathy, and ends up endorsing so many aspects of their worldview, that he must simply _be_ a closet rationalist himself, and therefore can't write about them with any pretense of journalistic or anthropological detachment. For my part, I'd say: it's true that _The AI Does Not Hate You_ is what you get if you treat rationalists as extremely smart (if unusual) people from whom you might learn something of consequence, rather than as monkeys in a zoo. On the other hand, Chivers does perform the journalist's task of constantly challenging the rationalists he meets, often with points that (if upheld) would be fatal to their worldview. One of the rationalists' best features--and this precisely matches my own experience--is that, far from clamming up or storming off when faced with such challenges ("lo! the visitor is not one of us!"), the rationalists positively relish them.

It occurred to me the other day that we'll never know how the rationalists' ideas would've developed, had they continued to do so in a cultural background like that of the late 20th century. As Chivers points out, the rationalists today are effectively caught in the crossfire of a much larger cultural war--between, to their right, the recrudescent know-nothing authoritarians, and to their left, what one could variously describe as woke culture, call-out culture, or sneer culture. On its face, it might seem laughable to conflate the rationalists with today's resurgent fascists: many rationalists are driven by their utilitarianism to advocate open borders and massive aid to the Third World; the rationalist community is about as welcoming of alternative genders and sexualities as it's humanly possible to be; and leading rationalists like Scott Alexander and Eliezer Yudkowsky strongly condemned Trump for the obvious reasons. 

Chivers, however, explains how the problem started. On rationalist Internet forums, many misogynists and white nationalists and so forth encountered nerds willing to _debate their ideas politely_ , rather than immediately banning them as more mainstream venues would. As a result, many of those forces of darkness (and they probably don't mind being called that) predictably congregated on the rationalist forums, and their stench predictably wore off on the rationalists themselves. Furthermore, this isn't an easy-to-fix problem, because debating ideas on their merits, extending charity to ideological opponents, etc. is sort of the rationalists' _entire shtick_ , whereas denouncing and no-platforming anyone who can be connected to an ideological enemy (in the modern parlance, "punching Nazis") is the entire shtick of those condemning the rationalists.

Compounding the problem is that, as anyone who's ever hung out with STEM nerds might've guessed, the rationalist community tends to skew WASP, Asian, or Jewish, non-impoverished, and male. Worse yet, while many rationalists live their lives in progressive enclaves and strongly support progressive values, they'll also undergo extreme anguish if they feel forced to subordinate truth to those values.

Chivers writes that all of these issues "blew up in spectacular style at the end of 2014," right here on this blog. Oh, what the hell, I'll just quote him:

> Scott Aaronson is, I think it's fair to say, a member of the Rationalist community. He's a prominent theoretical computer scientist at the University of Texas at Austin, and writes a very interesting, maths-heavy blog called Shtetl-Optimised.
> 
> People in the comments under his blog were discussing feminism and sexual harassment. And Aaronson, in a comment in which he described himself as a fan of Andrea Dworkin, described having been terrified of speaking to women as a teenager and young man. This fear was, he said, partly that of being thought of as a sexual abuser or creep if any woman ever became aware that he sexually desired them, a fear that he picked up from sexual-harassment-prevention workshops at his university and from reading feminist literature. This fear became so overwhelming, he said in the comment that came to be known as Comment #171, that he had 'constant suicidal thoughts' and at one point 'actually begged a psychiatrist to prescribe drugs that would chemically castrate me (I had researched which ones), because a life of mathematical asceticism was the only future that I could imagine for myself.' So when he read feminist articles talking about the 'male privilege' of nerds like him, he didn't recognise the description, and so felt himself able to declare himself 'only' 97 per cent on board with the programme of feminism.
> 
> It struck me as a thoughtful and rather sweet remark, in the midst of a long and courteous discussion with a female commenter. But it got picked up, weirdly, by some feminist bloggers, including one who described it as 'a yalp of entitlement combined with an aggressive unwillingness to accept that women are human beings just like men' and that Aaronson was complaining that 'having to explain my suffering to women when they should already be there, mopping my brow and offering me beers and blow jobs, is so tiresome.'
> 
> Scott Alexander (_not_ Scott Aaronson) then wrote a furious 10,000-word defence of his friend… (p. 214-215)

And then Chivers goes on to explain Scott Alexander's central thesis, in [Untitled](https://slatestarcodex.com/2015/01/01/untitled/), that privilege is not a one-dimensional axis, so that (to take one example) society can make many women in STEM miserable while _also_ making shy male nerds miserable in different ways.

For nerds, perhaps an alternative title for Chivers's book could be "The Normal People Do Not Hate You (Not All of Them, Anyway)." It's as though Chivers is demonstrating, through understated example, that taking delight in nerds' suffering, wanting them to be miserable and alone, mocking their weird ideas, is not simply the default, well-adjusted human reaction, with any other reaction being 'creepy' and 'problematic.' Some might even go so far as to apply the latter adjectives to the sneerers' attitude, the one that dresses up schoolyard bullying in a social-justice wig.

Reading Chivers's book prompted me to reflect on my own relationship to the rationalist community. For years, I interacted often with the community--I've known Robin Hanson since ~2004 and Eliezer Yudkowsky since ~2006, and our blogs bounced off each other--but I never considered myself a member. I never ranked [paperclip-maximizing AIs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instrumental_convergence#Paperclip_maximizer) among humanity's more urgent threats--indeed, I saw them as a distraction from an all-too-likely climate catastrophe that will leave its survivors lucky to have stone tools, let alone AIs. I was also repelled by what I saw as the rationalists' cultier aspects. I even once toyed with the idea of changing the name of this blog to "More Wrong" or "Wallowing in Bias," as a play on the rationalists' [LessWrong](https://www.lesswrong.com/) and [OvercomingBias](http://www.overcomingbias.com/).

But I've drawn much closer to the community over the last few years, because of a combination of factors:

  1. The comment-171 affair. This was not the sort of thing that could provide any new information about the likelihood of a dangerous AI being built, but _was_ (to put it mildly) the sort of thing that can tell you who your friends are. I learned that empathy works a lot like intelligence, in that those who boast of it most loudly are often the ones who lack it.
  2. The astounding progress in [deep learning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deep_learning) and [reinforcement learning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinforcement_learning) and [GANs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generative_adversarial_network), which caused me (like everyone else, perhaps) to update in the direction of human-level AI in our lifetimes being an actual live possibility,
  3. The rise of [Scott Alexander](https://slatestarcodex.com/). To the charge that the rationalists are a cult, there's now the reply that Scott, with his constant equivocations and doubts, his deep dives into data, his clarity and self-deprecating humor, is perhaps the least culty cult leader in human history. Likewise, to the charge that the rationalists are basement-dwelling kibitzers who accomplish nothing of note in the real world, there's now the reply that Scott has attracted a huge mainstream following (Steven Pinker, Paul Graham, presidential candidate Andrew Yang…), purely by offering up what's self-evidently some of the best writing of our time.
  4. Research. The AI-risk folks started publishing some research papers that I found interesting--some with [relatively approachable problems](https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06565) that I could see myself trying to think about if quantum computing ever got boring. This shift seems to have happened at roughly around the same time my former student, [Paul Christiano](https://paulfchristiano.com/), "defected" from quantum computing to AI-risk research. 



Anyway, if you've spent years steeped in the rationalist blogosphere, read Eliezer's ["Sequences,"](https://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Sequences) and so on, _The AI Does Not Hate You_ will probably have little that's new, although it might still be interesting to revisit ideas and episodes that you know through a newcomer's eyes. To anyone else … well, reading the book would be a lot faster than spending all those years reading blogs! I've heard of some rationalists now giving out copies of the book to their relatives, by way of explaining how they've chosen to spend their lives.

I _still_ don't know whether there's a risk worth worrying about that a misaligned AI will threaten human civilization in my lifetime, or my children's lifetimes, or even 500 years--or whether everyone will look back and laugh at how silly some people once were to think that (except, silly in which way?). But I do feel fairly confident that _The AI Does Not Hate You_ will make a positive difference--possibly for the world, but at any rate for a little well-meaning community of sneered-at nerds obsessed with the future and with following ideas wherever they lead.
