---
title: "Book Review: “Viral” by Alina Chan and Matt Ridley"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Sat, 01 Jan 2022"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=6183"
---

Happy New Year, everyone!

It was exactly two years ago that it first became publicly knowable--though most of us _wouldn 't_ know for at least two more months--just how freakishly horrible is the branch of the wavefunction we're on. I.e., that our branch wouldn't _just_ include Donald Trump as the US president, but _simultaneously_ a global pandemic far worse than any in living memory, and a world-historically bungled response to that pandemic.

So it's appropriate that I just finished reading [Viral: The Search for the Origin of COVID-19](https://www.amazon.com/Viral-Search-COVID-19-Matt-Ridley/dp/006313912X/ref=cm_cr_arp_d_product_top?ie=UTF8), by Broad Institute genetics postdoc Alina Chan and science writer Matt Ridley. Briefly, I think that this is one of the most important books so far of the twenty-first century.

Of course, speculation and argument about the origin of COVID goes back all the way to that fateful January of 2020, and most of this book's information was already available in fragmentary form elsewhere. And by their own judgment, Chan and Ridley don't end their search with a smoking-gun: no Patient Zero, no Bat Zero, no security-cam footage of the beaker dropped on the Wuhan Institute of Virology floor. Nevertheless, as far as I've seen, this is the first analysis of COVID's origin to treat the question with the full depth, gravity, and perspective that it deserves.

_Viral_ is essentially a 300-page plea to follow every lead as if we actually wanted to get to the bottom of things, and in particular, yes, to take the possibility of a lab leak a hell of a lot more seriously than was publicly permitted in 2020. (Fortuitously, much of this shift already happened as the authors were writing the book, but in June 2021 I was still [sneered at](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=5542#comment-1893250) for discussing the lab leak hypothesis on this blog.) _Viral_ is simultaneously a model of lucid, non-dumbed-down popular science writing and of cogent argumentation. The authors never once come across like tinfoil-hat-wearing conspiracy theorists, railing against the sheeple with their conventional wisdom: they're simply investigators carefully laying out what they're confident should _become_ conventional wisdom, with the many uncertainties and error bars explicitly noted. If you read the book and your mind works anything like mine, be forewarned that you might come out agreeing with a lot of it.

I would say that _Viral_ proves the following propositions beyond reasonable doubt:

  * Virologists, including at Shi Zhengli's group at WIV and at Peter Daszak's EcoHealth Alliance, were engaged in _unbelievably_ risky work, including collecting virus-laden fecal samples from thousands of bats in remote caves, transporting them to the dense population center of Wuhan, and modifying them to be more dangerous, e.g., through serial passage through human cells and the insertion of furin cleavage sites. Years before the COVID-19 outbreak, there were experts remarking on how risky this research was and trying to stop it. Had they known just _how_ lax the biosecurity was in Wuhan--dangerous pathogens experimented on in BSL-2 labs, etc. etc.--they would have been louder.  

  * Even if it _didn 't_ cause the pandemic, the massive effort to collect and enhance bat coronaviruses now appears to have been of dubious value. It did not lead to an actionable early warning about how bad COVID-19 was going to be, nor did it lead to useful treatments, vaccines, or mitigation measures, all of which came from other sources.  

  * There are multiple routes by which SARS-CoV2, or its progenitor, could've made its way, otherwise undetected, from the remote bat caves of Yunnan province or some other southern location to the city of Wuhan a thousand miles away, as it has to do in any plausible origin theory. Having said that, the regular Yunnan→Wuhan traffic in scientific samples of precisely these kinds of viruses, sustained over a decade, _does_ stand out a bit! On the infamous coincidence of the pandemic starting practically next door to the world's center for studying SARS-like coronaviruses, rather than near where the horseshoe bats live in the wild, Chan and Ridley memorably quote Humphrey Bogart's line from _Casablanca_ : "Of all the gin joints in all the towns in all the world, she walks into mine."  

  * The seafood market was probably "just" an early superspreader site, rather than the site of the original spillover event. No bats or pangolins at all, and relatively few mammals of any kind, appear to have been sold at that market, and no sign of SARS-CoV2 was ever found in any of the animals despite searching.  

  * Most remarkably, **Shi and Daszak have increasingly stonewalled** , refusing to answer 100% reasonable questions from fellow virologists. They've acted more and more like defendants exercising their right to remain silent than like participants in a joint search for the truth. That might be understandable if they'd already answered ad nauseam and wearied of repeating themselves, but with many crucial questions, they haven't answered even once. They've refused to make available a key database of all the viruses WIV had collected, which WIV inexplicably took offline in September 2019. When, in January 2020, Shi disclosed to the world that WIV had collected a virus called RaTG13, which was 96% identical to SARS-CoV2, she didn't mention that it was collected from a mine in Mojiang, which the WIV had sampled from over and over because six workers had gotten a SARS-like pneumonia there in 2012 and three had died from it. She didn't let on that her group had been studying RaTG13 for years--giving, instead, the false impression that they'd just noticed it recently, when searching WIV's records for cousins of SARS-CoV2. And she didn't see fit to mention that WIV had collected _eight other_ coronaviruses resembling SARS-CoV2 from the same mine (!). Shi's original papers on SARS-CoV2 also passed in silence over the virus's furin cleavage site--even though SARS-CoV2 was the first sarbecoronavirus with that feature, and Shi herself had recently demonstrated adding furin cleavage sites to other viruses to make them more transmissible, and the cleavage site would've leapt out immediately to any coronavirus researcher as the most interesting feature of SARS-CoV2 and as key to its transmissibility. Some of these points had to be uncovered by Internet sleuths, poring over doctoral theses and the like, after which Shi would glancingly acknowledge the points in talks without ever explaining her earlier silences. Shi and Daszak refused to cooperate with Chan and Ridley's book, and have stopped answering questions more generally. When people politely ask Daszak about these matters on Twitter, he blocks them.  

  * The Chinese regime has been every bit as obstructionist as you might expect: destroying samples, blocking credible investigations, censoring researchers, and preventing journalists from accessing the Mojiang mine. So Shi at least has the excuse that, even if she'd _wanted_ to come clean with everything relevant she knows about WIV's bat coronavirus work, she might not be able to do so without endangering herself or loved ones. Daszak has no such excuse.



It's important to understand that, even in the worst case--that (1) there was a lab leak, and (2) Shi and Daszak are knowingly withholding information relevant to it--they're far from monsters. Even in _Viral_ 's relentlessly unsparing account, they come across as genuine believers in their mission to protect the world from the next pandemic.

And it's like: imagine devoting your life to that mission, having most of the world refuse to take you seriously, and then the calamity happens exactly like you said … _except_ that, not only did your efforts fail to prevent it, but there's a live possibility that they _caused_ it. It's conceivable that your life's work managed to save _minus_ 15 million lives and create _minus_ $50 trillion in economic value.

Very few scientists in history have faced that sort of psychic burden, perhaps not even the ones who built the atomic bomb. I _hope_ I'd maintain my scientific integrity under such an astronomical weight, but I'm doubtful that I would. Would you?

_Viral_ very wisely never tries to psychoanalyze Shi and Daszak. I fear that one might need a lot of conceptual space between "knowing" and "not knowing," "suspecting" and "not suspecting," to do justice to the planet-sized enormity of what's at stake here. Suppose, for example, that an initial investigation in January 2020 reassured you that SARS-CoV2 _probably_ hadn't come from your lab: would you continue trying to get to the bottom of things, or would you thereafter decide the matter was closed?

For all that, I agree with Chan and Ridley that COVID-19 might well have had a zoonotic origin after all. And one point _Viral_ makes abundantly clear is that, if our goal is to prevent the next pandemic, then resolving the mystery of COVID-19 actually matters less than one might think. This is because, whichever possibility--zoonotic spillover _or_ lab leak--turns out to be the truth of this case, **the other possibility would remain absolutely terrifying and would demand urgent action as well**. Read the book and see for yourself.

Searching my inbox, I found an email from April 16, 2020 where I told someone who'd asked me that the lab-leak hypothesis seemed perfectly plausible to me (albeit no _more_ than plausible), that I couldn't understand why it wasn't being investigated more, but that I was hesitant to blog about these matters. As I [wrote](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=5542) seven months ago, I now see my lack of courage on this as having been a personal failing. Obviously, I'm just a quantum computing theorist, not a biologist, so I don't _have_ to have any thoughts whatsoever about the origin of COVID-19 … but I _did_ have some, and I didn't share them here only because of the likelihood that I'd be called an idiot on social media. Having now read Chan and Ridley, though, I think I'd take being called an idiot for this book review more as a positive signal about my courage than as a negative signal about my reasoning skills!

At one level, _Viral_ stands alongside, I dunno, _[Eichmann in Jerusalem](https://www.amazon.com/Eichmann-Jerusalem-Banality-Penguin-Classics/dp/0143039881)_ among the saddest books I've ever read. It's 300 pages of one of the great human tragedies of our lifetime balancing on a hinge between happening and not happening, and we all know how it turns out. On another level, though, _Viral_ is optimistic. Like with Richard Feynman's famous ["personal appendix"](https://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/51-l/docs/rogers-commission/Appendix-F.txt) about the Space Shuttle _Challenger_ explosion, the very act of writing such a book reflects a view that you're still allowed to ask questions; that one or two people armed with nothing but arguments can run rings around governments, newspapers, and international organizations; that we don't yet live in a post-truth world.
