---
title: "De-sneering my life"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Wed, 27 Feb 2019"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=4129"
---

If I'm being honest, the most exciting recent development in my life is this: a little over a month ago,**I stopped checking "SneerClub"** (a place I'd previously resolved not even to name here, but I think an exception is warranted now). Permanently, cold turkey. I won't even visit to read their sneers about this post. I've made progress cutting down on other self-destructive social media fixations as well. Many friends suggested this course to me, and I thank them all, though I ultimately had to follow my own path to the obvious.

Ironically, _the SneerClubbers themselves_ begged me to stop reading them (!), so presumably for once they'll be okay with something I did (but if not, I don't care). If any of them still have something to say to me, they can come to _this_ blog, or email me, or if they pass through Austin, set up a time to hash it out over chips and queso (my treat). What I'll no longer do is spend hours every week binge-reading a forum of people who've adopted nastiness and bad faith as their explicit principles. I'll no longer toss and turn at night wondering how it came about that two thousand Redditors hate Scott Aaronson so much, and what I could say or do (short of total self-abnegation) that would make them hate me less. I plan to spend the freed-up time _being_ Scott Aaronson.

Resolving to ignore one particular online hate pit--and then _sticking_ to the resolution, as so far I have--has been a pure, unmitigated improvement to my quality of life. If you don't believe me, ask my wife and kids. I recommend this course to anyone.

You could sensibly ask: why did I _ever_ spend time worrying about an anti-nerds-like-me forum that's so poisonous for its targets and participants alike? After long introspection, I think the answer is: there's a part of me, perhaps a gift from the childhood bullies, that's so obsessed with "society's hatred of STEM nerds," that it _constantly seeks out evidence to confirm that its fears are justified --_evidence that it can then wave in front of the rest of my brain to say "you see?? what did I always tell you?" And alas, whenever that part of my brain seeks such evidence, the world dutifully supplies mountains of it. It's never once disappointed.

Now the SneerClubbers--who are perceptive and talented in their cruelty, if in nothing else--notice this about me, and gleefully ridicule me for it. But they're oblivious to the central irony: that unlike the vast majority of humankind, or even the vast majority of social justice activists, they (the SneerClubbers) _really do_ hate everyone like me. They're _precisely_ what the paranoid part of my brain wrongly fears that everyone else I meet is secretly like. They're like someone who lectures you about your hilariously overblown fear of muggers, _while simultaneously mugging you_.

But at least they're not the contented and self-confident bullies of my childhood nightmares, kicking dirt down at nerds from atop their pinnacle of wokeness and social adeptness. If you spend enough time studying them, they themselves come across as angry, depressed, pathetic. So for example: [here's](https://www.reddit.com/r/math/comments/aexi9v/michael_atiyah_has_passed_away/edtrcc5/) one of my most persistent attackers, popping up on a math thread commemorating Michael Atiyah (one of the great mathematicians of the 20th century), just to insult Atiyah--randomly, gratuitously, and a few days after Atiyah had died. Almost everything posted all over Reddit by this individual--who uses the accurate tagline "unpleasantly radical"--has the same flavor. Somehow seeing this made it click for me: wait a second, _these_ are the folks are lecturing _me_ about my self-centeredness and arrogance and terrible social skills? Like, at least I _[try](https://www.quora.com/Why-is-Scott-Aaronson-so-nice)_ to be nice.

* * *

Scott Alexander, who writes the [world's best blog](https://slatestarcodex.com/) and is a more central target of SneerClub than I've been, [recently announced](https://slatestarcodex.com/2019/02/22/rip-culture-war-thread/) that he asked the moderators of [r/ssc](https://www.reddit.com/r/slatestarcodex/) to close its notorious "Culture War" thread, and they've done so--moving the thread to a new home on Reddit called ["TheMotte."](https://www.reddit.com/r/TheMotte/)

For those who don't know: r/ssc is the place on Reddit to discuss Scott's SlateStarCodex blog, though Scott himself was never too involved as more than a figurehead.  The Culture War thread was the place within r/ssc to discuss race, gender, immigration, and other hot-button topics.  The thread, which filled up with a bewildering thousands of comments per week (!), attracted the, err … _full range_ of political views, including leftists, libertarians, and moderates but also alt-righters, neoreactionaries, and white nationalists. Predictably, SneerClub treated the thread as a gift from heaven: a constant source of inflammatory material that they could use to smear Scott personally (even if most of the time, Scott hadn't even _seen_ the offending content, let alone endorsing it).

Four months ago, I was one of the apparently many friends who told Scott that I felt he should dissociate the Culture War thread from his brand. So I congratulate him on his decision, which (despite his eloquently-expressed misgivings) I feel confident was the right one. Think about it this way: nobody's freedom of speech has been curtailed--the thread continues full steam at TheMotte, for anyone who enjoys it--but meanwhile, the sneerers have been deprived of a golden weapon with which to slime Scott. Meanwhile, while the sneerers themselves might never change their minds about anything, Scott has demonstrated to third parties that he's open and reasonable and ready to compromise, like the debater who happily switches to his opponent's terminology. What's not to like?

* * *

A couple weeks ago, while in Albuquerque for the [SQuInT](http://physics.unm.edu/SQuInT/2019/index.php) conference, I visited the excellent [National Museum of Nuclear Science and History](https://www.nuclearmuseum.org/). It was depressing, as it should have been, to tour the detailed exhibits about the murderous events surrounding the birth of the nuclear era: the Holocaust, the Rape of Nanking, the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. It was depressing in a different way to tour the exhibits about the early Atomic Age, and see the boundless optimism that 'unleashing the power of the atom' would finally usher in a near-utopia of space travel and clean energy--and then to compare that vision to where we are now, with climate change ravaging the planet and (in a world-historic irony) the people who care most about the environment having denounced and marginalized the most reliable source of carbon-free energy, the one that probably had the best chance to avert our planet's terrifying future.

But on the bright side: how wonderful to have born into a time and place when, for the most part, those who hate you have only the power to destroy your life that you yourself grant them. How wonderful when one can blunt their knives by simply refusing to open a browser tab.
