---
title: "Exciting opportunities at Kabul University!"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Sun, 05 Sep 2021"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=5807"
---

**Update (Sept. 6):** Alright, as promised in this post, I've now matched a reader's generosity by donating $2,000 to [NARAL's Avow fund](https://secure.actblue.com/donate/avow?refcode=20210827NARAL), which is fighting for abortion rights for women in Texas. Woke people on Twitter, I invite you/youse/y'all to figure out some creative ways to condemn me for that.

* * *

Normally, early fall is the time when I'd use this blog to advertise positions in quantum information and theoretical computer science at the University of Texas at Austin, for prospective PhD students, postdocs, and faculty. This year, you might say, anyone trying to recruit academics to Texas has a … _teensy bit_ of a PR problem. We already had PR problems, first over the "failure by design" of our electrical grid in the winter, second over Governor Abbott's battle against local mask mandates, which has made Texas the second-most notoriously covid-friendly state after Florida.

Now, of course, Texas has [effectively outlawed abortion](https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2021/09/texas-republicans-abortion-ban-backfire/619956/?utm_source=facebook&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=share&fbclid=IwAR2nCtXtpXUQQ5SBTHJLtd8Fkc8DFwuNCA1gdi3weUBlRqMrU8oKR5YUhjE)--well, after the 6th week, which is before many women even realize they're pregnant, and when the fetus is still the size of a grain of rice and looks like this.

[](https://scottaaronson.blog/6week.jpg)

There are no exceptions for rape or incest, and--this is the "novel" part--there's a bounty system, with $10,000+ fines for anyone who helps in any way with an abortion, payable to anyone who snitches on them. Texas has openly defied _Roe v. Wade_ and, for the first time in half a century, has gotten five Supreme Court justices (three appointed by Donald Trump) to go along with it. _Roe v. Wade_ is _de facto_ no longer the law of the United States.

[](https://scottaaronson.blog/when.jpg)_With a 15-week cutoff, a right to abortion would still functionally exist. At 6 weeks, it no longer functionally exists._

And as for our recruiting at UT Austin … I fear we might as well now be trying to recruit colleagues to [Kabul University](https://ku.edu.af/). It's like, imagine some department chair at Kabul U., this week, trying to woo a star female physicist from abroad: "Oh, don't worry … you'll get used to wearing a burqa in no time! And the ban on being alone with unrelated males is actually a _plus_ for you; it just means you'll be freed from onerous teaching and committee assignments. Best yet, I've received personal assurances from our local Taliban commander that you almost certainly won't be stoned for your licentiousness and whoredom. Err … no offense, those were his words, not mine."

For five years, my recruiting pitches for UT Austin have often involved stressing how Austin is a famously hip, tolerant, high-tech, educated city--a "blueberry in the tomato soup," as Rick Perry put it--and how Texas itself might indeed turn blue any election cycle, given the explosive growth of its metropolitan population, and how the crazy state politics is unlikely to affect an Austinite's personal life--at least, by noticeably more than the crazy _national_ politics would affect their personal life. I can no longer make this pitch with a straight face, or certainly not to women.

Like, I'm lucky that none of the women in my close family have ever needed an abortion, and that if they did, it would be easy for them to travel out of Texas to get one. But having carried to term two healthy but [difficult](https://americanpregnancy.org/healthy-pregnancy/pregnancy-complications/hyperemesis-gravidarum/) pregnancies, my wife Dana has often stressed to me how insane she finds the very idea of being _forced_ by the government to go through with such an ordeal. If women considering moving to Texas feel likewise, I can't argue with them. More than that: if Texas continues on what half the country sees as a journey back to the Middle Ages, with no opt-outs allowed for the residents of its left-leaning urban centers, Dana and I will not be able to remain here, and many of our friends won't either.

So why aren't we packing our bags already? Partly because the current situation is inherently, obviously unstable. [SB8](https://legiscan.com/TX/text/SB8/id/2395961) can't long remain the law of Texas while _Roe v. Wade_ remains the law of the United States: one of them has to give. I confess to being confused about why some abortion provider in Texas, with funding from national pro-choice groups, hasn't _already_ broken the law, welcomed a lawsuit, and forced the courts to rule explicitly on whether _Roe v. Wade_ still stands and why or why not, rather than gutting a core part of American jurisprudence literally under cover of night. I'm also confused about why some solid blue state, like Massachusetts or Hawaii, isn't right now passing a law that would let any citizen sue any other for carrying a firearm--thereby forcing the five Supreme Hypocrites, in striking down that law, to admit that they _don 't_ believe after all that state laws get to trample what the Supreme Court has held to be constitutional rights, merely by outsourcing the enforcement to random vigilantes.

My best guess is that Thomas, Alito, Gorsuch, Kavanaugh, and Barrett are already plotting to replace _Roe_ by something much more restrictive, albeit probably not _quite_ as shockingly draconian as Texas's current ban on all abortions after six weeks, nor _quite_ as breathtakingly insane as its bounty system for anyone who snitches about abortions. My best guess is that they saw last week's ruling as a way to test the waters and soften the country up: if you're going to rescind what multiple generations of Americans have grown up seeing as a fundamental right, best not to do it too suddenly. My best guess is that Democrats will respond by making abortion a central campaign issue in 2022 and 2024, and that given the public's [58%-32% support](https://news.gallup.com/poll/350804/americans-opposed-overturning-roe-wade.aspx) for _Roe_ , the Democrats will do pretty well with that--to the point where, like the proverbial dog that finally catches the car, Republicans might come to regret actually sinking their jaws into _Roe_ , rather than just conspicuously chasing it down the street for half a century.

I have friends who are sincere, thoughtful pro-lifers. I admire, if nothing else, their principled dedication to a moral stance that regularly gets condemned in academia. But I'd also say to them: even if _you_ think of abortion as murder, a solid majority of Americans don't, and it's hard to see a stable way of getting what you want that skips the step where you change those Americans' minds. Indeed, there's long been a pro-choice critique of _Roe_ , which says that, by short-circuiting the political loosening of abortion restrictions that was already underway in the 70s, _Roe_ fueled the growth of the radical right that's now all but destroyed America. For _Roe_ falsely convinced pro-lifers that all they needed to do was seize control of the Supreme Court, by any means fair or foul, when what they _really_ needed to do was convince the public.

And, let's be honest, convincing the public means convincing them to adopt a religious as opposed to secular framework for morality. (And not just _any_ religious framework: Orthodox Jews, for example, while not exactly fans of abortion, are [fine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judaism_and_abortion) with it under many circumstances. In the Jewish view, so the old classic goes, the fetus attains full personhood only after graduating medical school.) Of the Americans who want abortion to be illegal in all or most cases, [94%](https://www.pewforum.org/religious-landscape-study/views-about-abortion/) are at least "fairly certain" that God exists, and 79% are "absolutely certain"--consistent with my experience of having met highly intelligent and articulate pro-lifers, but never _secular_ ones. Modulo [Lizardman's Constant](https://slatestarcodex.com/2013/04/12/noisy-poll-results-and-reptilian-muslim-climatologists-from-mars/), virtually _all_ pro-lifers have metaphysical commitments about God and the soul that presumably do some of the heavy lifting for them. If the case for a blanket abortion ban can be made in terms that are compelling to a secular, rationalist, tradeoffs-based morality, no one seems to have done it yet.

From the standpoint of secular moral philosophy, my own opinion is that no one has ever improved on the [searching analysis](https://scrapsfromtheloft.com/society/on-abortion-carl-sagan-ann-druyan/) of the abortion question that Carl Sagan and Ann Druyan published in 1990. After painstakingly laying out scientific facts, moral hypotheticals, and commonsense principles, Sagan and Druyan ultimately conclude that the right question to ask is when the fetus develops something that's _recognizably a human brain, processing thoughts and emotions_. In practice, that probably means drawing a hard line at the end of the second trimester. Coincidentally, that's almost exactly where _Roe v. Wade_ drew the line, but Sagan and Druyan's reasoning is completely different: they reject _Roe_ 's criterion of viability outside the womb, as both morally irrelevant and contingent on medical technology.

Reasonable people could disagree with the details of Sagan and Druyan's analysis. But _if_ we agree that

(1) a sperm and unfertizilied egg have a "personhood" of 0,

(2) a newborn baby has a "personhood" of 1, and

(3) whatever "personhood" is, it's somehow tied to the gradual growth of neurons and dendrites in the physical universe, rather than to a mystical and discontinuous moment of ensoulment,

… then by the [intermediate value theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intermediate_value_theorem), for all p∈(0,1), there's going to be _some_ stage of fetal development where the fetus has a personhood of p. Which means that we're going to be drawing a debatable line, making a compromise, just like the majority did in _Roe_. To me, one of the strangest aspects of the abortion debate is how both sides came to view _Roe v. Wade_ as the "pro-choice maximalist position," forgetting how it itself was an attempted compromise between conflicting moral intuitions.

Another strange aspect of the debate is how the most visible representatives of both sides seem to have given up, decades ago, on actually _arguing_ for their positions. Maybe it's because people simply threw up their hands in futility; or because all the ground had been covered with nothing left to say; or because the debate was so obviously entangled with religion, and we have a polite norm of not arguing about religion; or because both positions hardened into tribal identity markers, to be displayed rather than defended. Whatever the reason, though, by the mid-90s everything became about border skirmishes one or two steps removed from the actual question: e.g., if the woman is under 18, should her parents be notified? should she be shown pictures of her fetus and given a 24-hour waiting period in hopes she'll reconsider? is this judicial nominee hiding his or her anti-abortion views?

Now that Texas and five Supreme Court justices have launched a frontal assault on _Roe_ --it's impossible to see it any other way--it seems to me that the long armistice is over. The pro-life side will have to make the case for its moral framework to a populace that will suddenly be paying more attention--and that includes tens of millions of Americans who hadn't even been born the last time mainstream figures debated abortion head-on. The pro-choice side can then counterargue for _its_ moral framework. If any pro-lifers are raring for this fight, I'll point out that one of the most dramatic demographic changes, since the last time abortion was a "hot war," has been a [doubling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_religion_in_the_United_States#Demographics) in the percentage of Americans who are atheist, agnostic, or religiously unaffiliated.

Let me close this post with two things.

Firstly, if anyone is still unclear where I stand: over the next week, I will match _Shtetl-Optimized_ readers' donations to [NARAL](https://www.prochoiceamerica.org/) up to $2,000. If you'd like to participate, just leave a comment with the amount you donated. If I've argued with certain strains of feminism on this blog, that gives me all the _more_ obligation to support the strains that I regard as fundamentally correct.

Secondly, come join us at the University of Kab … I mean Texas at Austin! For grad students, [see here](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/graduate/prospective-students/apply); for faculty, [see here](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/faculty/recruiting); for postdocs, email me a CV and recent publications and have two reference letters sent to me by December 31st. In the US, the east coast is now being ravaged beyond recognition by hurricanes and the west coast by wildfires. Here in Texas, all _we_ have to deal with is extreme heat, a failing electrical grid, runaway covid, and now the ban on abortion. Hook 'em Hadamards!
