---
title: "FCRC Highlights"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Fri, 19 Jun 2015"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=2335"
---

By popular request, here are some highlights from this week's FCRC conference in Portland, Oregon:

  * The [edit distance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edit_distance) between two strings means the minimum number of insertions, deletions, and replacements needed to convert one string to the other: for example, SHTETL and SHETLAND have an edit distance of 4. Edit distance has major, obvious applications to DNA sequence comparison, as well as plagiarism detection and many other things. There's a clever dynamic programming algorithm to compute the edit distance between two n-bit strings, but it takes ~n2 time, which is already too slow for many applications. Can you do better? I remember wondering about that 15 years ago, as a beginning grad student taking Richard Karp's computational biology course. Now Arturs Backurs and Piotr Indyk have [shown](http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.0348) that, if you can compute edit distance in O(n2-ε) time for any ε>0, then you can also solve CNF-SAT in 2cn time for some c<1, thereby refuting the [Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponential_time_hypothesis). For more about this important result, see [this _MIT News_ article](http://newsoffice.mit.edu/2015/algorithm-genome-best-possible-0610).


  * [Olivier Temam](http://pages.saclay.inria.fr/olivier.temam/) gave a superb keynote talk about hardware neural networks. His main points were these: implementing neural nets with special-purpose hardware was a faddish idea a few decades ago, but was abandoned once people realized that (a) it didn't work that great, and (b) more to the point, anything you could do with special-purpose hardware, you could do better and more easily with silicon chips, after waiting just a few years for Moore's Law to catch up. Today, however, two things have spurred a revival of the idea: firstly, neural nets (renamed "deep learning," and done with bigger networks and way more training data) are delivering spectacular, state-of-the-art results; and second, transistors have stopped shrinking, so it now makes more sense to think about the few orders-of-magnitude speed improvement that you can get from special-purpose hardware. This would mean organizing computers kind-of, sort-of like the brain is organized, with (for example) memory integrated into the connections between the "neurons" (processing elements), rather than on a separate chip that's connected to the processor by a bus. On the other hand, Temam also stressed that computer architects shouldn't slavishly copy the brain: instead, they should simply build the fastest hardware they can to implement the best available machine-learning algorithms, and they should rely on the machine-learning theorists to incorporate whatever broad lessons are to be gleaned from neuroscience (as they've done several times in the past).


  * Three separate sets of authors (Koppula, Lewko, and Waters; Canetti, Holmgren, Jain, and Vaikuntanathan; and Bitansky, Garg, Lin, Pass, and Telang) [independently](http://dl.acm.org/authorize.cfm?key=N98538) [wrote](http://dl.acm.org/authorize?N98539) [papers](http://dl.acm.org/authorize?N98530) that showed how to achieve "indistinguishability obfuscation" (i.o.) for Turing machines rather than for circuits. For those not in the world of theoretical crypto, i.o. is a hot concept that basically means: obfuscating a program in such a way that no adversary can figure out anything about _which program you started with_ , among all the possible programs that compute the same function in roughly the same amount of time. (On the other hand, the adversary might be able to learn more than she could if merely given a _black box_ for the function. And that's why this kind of obfuscation falls short of the "gold standard," which was shown to be impossible in general in seminal work by [Barak et al.](http://www.boazbarak.org/Papers/obf_informal.html)) Recent papers have shown how to achieve the weaker notion of i.o., but they first require converting your program to a Boolean circuit--something that's absurdly inefficient in practice, and also has the theoretical drawback of producing an obfuscated program whose size grows, not merely with the size of the original, unobfuscated program, but also with the amount of time the original program is supposed to run for. So, the new work gets around that drawback, by cleverly obfuscating a program whose purpose is to compute the "next step function" of the original program, on data that's itself encrypted. The talk was delivered in "tag team" format, with one representative from each group of authors speaking for 6-7 minutes. Surprisingly, it worked extremely well.


  * Laci Babai gave a truly epic hour-long Knuth Prize lecture, basically trying to summarize all of his work over the past 35 years (and related work by others), in 170 or so slides. The talk had not a single word of filler: it was just pure beef, result after result, some of them well-known and seminal (e.g., MIP=NEXP, AM[2]=AM[k], AlmostNP=MA, group membership in NP, group non-membership in AM…) and others obscure little gems. Boaz Barak commented that an entire semester-long course could be taught from the PowerPoint slides. Laci ended the talk by defining the [Babai point](http://www.cs.mcgill.ca/~chang/pub/ChaWX13.pdf), and then saying "having made my point, I'm done."


  * Ambainis (yes, the same Ambainis), Filmus and Le Gall had a [paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.5414) about the limitations of the techniques used to achieve all matrix multiplication algorithms from Coppersmith-Winograd (O(n2.3755)) onward, including those of Stothers 2010 (O(n2.3730)), Vassilevska Williams 2012 (O(n2.3728642)), and Le Gall 2014 (O(n2.3728639)). Their basic conclusion--not surprising, but still nice to establish formally--is that applying more and more massive computer search to the current ideas can't possibly get you below O(n2.308); new ideas will be needed to push further.


  * At the STOC business meeting, there was a long discussion about the proposal to turn STOC into a weeklong "theory festival," with more plenary talks (including from other fields), possibly more parallel sessions, etc. There were lots of interesting arguments, but alas, I was too tired and jetlagged to remember what they were. (Anyone who _does_ remember is welcome to chime in.)



There are many great things that I haven't written about--for example, I haven't even said a word about any of the three best paper talks!--but I'm out of energy right now. Others are more than welcome to share other FCRC highlights in the comments section.
