---
title: "Fight Fiercely"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Thu, 24 Apr 2025"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=8820"
---

Last week I visited Harvard and MIT, and as advertised in my [last post](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=8805), gave the Yip Lecture at Harvard on the subject "How Much Math Is Knowable?" The visit was hosted by Harvard's wonderful [Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications (CMSA)](https://cmsa.fas.harvard.edu/about-us/), directed by my former UT Austin colleague [Dan Freed](https://people.math.harvard.edu/~dafr/). Thanks so much to everyone at CMSA for the visit.

And good news! You can now [watch my lecture on YouTube here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VplMHWSZf5c):

I'm told it was one of my better performances. As always, I strongly recommend watching at 2x speed. 

I opened the lecture by saying that, while obviously it would always be an honor to give the Yip Lecture at Harvard, it's _especially_ an honor right now, as the rest of American academia looks to Harvard to defend the value of our entire enterprise. I urged Harvard to ["fight fiercely,"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=27PSHASlGUU) in the words of the Tom Lehrer song.

I wasn't just fishing for applause; I meant it. It's crucial for people to understand that, in its total war against universities, MAGA has now lost, not merely the anti-Israel leftists, but _also_ most conservatives, classical liberals, Zionists, etc. with any intellectual scruples whatsoever. To my mind, this opens up the possibility for a broad, nonpartisan response, highlighting everything universities (yes, even Harvard ) do for our civilization that's worth defending.

For three days in my old hometown of Cambridge, MA, I met back-to-back with friends and colleagues old and new. Almost to a person, they were terrified about whether they'll be able to keep doing science as their funding gets decimated, but especially terrified for anyone who they cared about on visas and green cards. International scholars can now be handcuffed, deported, and even placed in indefinite confinement for pretty much any reason--including long-ago speeding tickets--or no reason at all. The resulting fear has paralyzed, in a matter of months, an American scientific juggernaut that took a century to build.

A few of my colleagues personally knew [Rümeysa Öztürk](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Detention_of_R%C3%BCmeysa_%C3%96zt%C3%BCrk), the Turkish student at Tufts who currently sits in prison for coauthoring an editorial for her student newspaper advocating the boycott of Israel. I of course disagree with what Öztürk wrote … and that is **completely irrelevant** to my moral demand that she go free. Even _supposing_ the government had much more on her than this one editorial, still the proper response would seem to be a deportation notice--"either contest our evidence in court, or else get on the next flight back to Turkey"--rather than grabbing Öztürk off the street and sending her to indefinite detention in Louisiana. It's impossible to imagine any university worth attending where the students live in constant fear of imprisonment for the civil expression of opinions.

To [help calibrate](https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/2025/04/21/harvard-sues-trump-administration-funding-antisemitism/) where things stand right now, here's the individual you might expect to be most on board with a crackdown on antisemitism at Harvard:

> Jason Rubenstein, the executive director of Harvard Hillel, said that the school is in the midst of a long — and long-overdue — reckoning with antisemitism, and that [President] Garber has taken important steps to address the problem. Methodical federal civil rights oversight could play a constructive role in that reform, he said. “But the government’s current, fast-paced assault against Harvard - shuttering apolitical, life-saving research; targeting the university’s tax-exempt status; and threatening all student visas … is neither deliberate nor methodical, and its disregard for the necessities of negotiation and due process threatens the bulwarks of institutional independence and the rule of law that undergird our shared freedoms."

Meanwhile, as the storm clouds over American academia continue to darken, I'll just continue to write what I think about everything, because what else can I do?

Last night, alas, I lost yet another left-wing academic friend, the fourth or fifth I've lost since October 7. For while I was ready to take a ferocious public stand against the current US government, for the survival and independence of our universities, and for free speech and due process for foreign students, this friend regarded all that as insufficient. He demanded that I _also_ clear the tentifada movement of any charge of antisemitism. For, as he patiently explained to me (while worrying that I wouldn't grasp the point), while the protesters may have technically violated university rules, disrupted education, created a hostile environment in the sense of Title VI antidiscrimination law in ways that would be obvious were we discussing any other targeted minority, etc. etc., still, _the only thing that matters morally is that the protesters represent "the powerless," whereas Zionist Jews like me represent "the powerful."_ So, I told this former friend to go fuck himself. Too harsh? Maybe if he hadn't been Jewish himself, I could've forgiven him for letting the world's oldest conspiracy theory colonize his brain.

For me, the deep significance of in-person visits, including my recent trip to Harvard, is that they reassure me of the preponderance of sanity within my little world--and thereby of my own sanity. Online, every single day I feel isolated and embattled: pressed in on one side by MAGA forces who claim to care about antisemitism, but then turn out to want the destruction of science, universities, free speech, international exchange, due process of law, and everything else that's made the modern world less than fully horrible; and on the other side, by leftists who say they stand with me for science and academic freedom and civil rights and everything else that’s good, but then add that the struggle needs to continue until the downfall of the scheming, moneyed Zionists and the liberation of Palestine from river to sea.

When I travel to universities to give talks, though, I meet one sane, reasonable human being after another. Almost to a person, they acknowledge the reality of antisemitism, ideological monoculture, bureaucracy, spiraling costs, and many other problems at universities--_and they care about universities enough to want to fix those problems_ , rather than gleefully nuking the universities from orbit as MAGA is doing. Mostly, though, people just want me to sign _Quantum Computing Since Democritus_ , or tell me how much they like this blog, or ask questions about quantum algorithms or the Busy Beaver function. Which is fine too, and which you can do in the comments.
