---
title: "Huck Finn and the gaslighting of America"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Mon, 23 Nov 2020"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=5106"
---

For the past month, I've been reading _The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn_ to my 7-year-old daughter Lily. Is she too young for it? Is there a danger that she'll slip up and say the n-word in school? I guess so, maybe. But I found it worthwhile just for the understanding that lit up her face when she realized what it meant that Huck would help Jim escape slavery even though Huck really, genuinely believed that he'd burn in hell for it.

_Huck Finn_ has been one of my favorite books since I was just slightly older than Lily. It's the greatest statement by one of history's greatest writers about human stupidity and gullibility and evil and greed, but also about the power of seeing what's right in front of your nose to counteract those forces. (It's also a go-to source for details of 19th-century river navigation.) It rocks.

The other day, after we finished a chapter, I asked Lily whether she thought that injustice against Black people in America ended with the abolition of slavery. No, she replied. I asked: how much longer did it continue for? She said she didn't know. So I said: if I told you that once, people in charge of an American election tried to throw away millions of votes that came from places where Black people lived--supposedly because some numbers didn't exactly add up, except they didn't care about similar numbers not adding up in places where White people lived--how long ago would she guess that happened? 100 years ago? 50 years? She didn't know. So I showed her the news from the last hour.

These past few weeks, my comment queue has filled with missives, most of which I've declined to publish, about the giant conspiracy involving George Soros and Venezuela and dead people, which fabricated the overwhelmingly Democratic votes from overwhelmingly Democratic cities like Philadelphia and Milwaukee and Detroit (though for some reason, they weren't _quite_ as overwhelmingly Democratic as in other recent elections), while for some reason declining to help Democrats in downballot races. Always, these commenters confidently insist, _I 'm_ the Pravda-reading brainwashed dupe, _I 'm_ the unreasonable one, if I don't accept this.

This is the literal meaning of "gaslighting": the intentional construction of an alternate reality so insistently as to make the sane doubt their sanity. It occurred to me: _Huck Finn_ could be read as an extended fable about gaslighting. The Grangerfords make their deadly feud with the Shepherdsons seem normal and natural. The fraudulent King and Duke make Huck salute them as royalty. Tom convinces Huck that the former's harebrained schemes for freeing Jim are just the way it's done, and Huck is an idiot for preferring the simplistic approach of just freeing him. And of course, the entire culture gaslights Huck that good is evil and evil is good. Huck doesn't fight the gaslighting as hard as we'd like him to, but he develops as a character to the extent he does.

Today, the Confederacy--which, as we've learned the past five years, never died, and is as alive and angry now as it was in Twain's time--is trying to win by gaslighting what it couldn't win at Antietam and Gettysburg and Vicksburg. It's betting that if it just insists, adamantly enough, that someone who lost an election by hundreds of thousands of votes spread across multiple states actually won the election, then it can bend the universe to its will.

Glued to the news, listening to Giuliani and McEnany and so on, reading the Trump campaign's legal briefs, I keep asking myself one question: _do they actually believe this shit?_ Some of the only insight I got about that question came from a [long piece](https://graymirror.substack.com/p/reflections-on-the-late-election) by Curtis Yarvin a.k.a. Mencius Moldbug, who's been called one of the leading thinkers of neoreaction and who sometimes responds to this blog. Esoterically, Yarvin says that he actually _prefers_ a Biden victory, but only because Trump has proven himself unworthy by submitting himself to nerdy electoral rules rather than simply seizing power. (If that's not _quite_ what Yarvin meant--well, I'm about as competent to render his irony-soaked meanings in plain language as I'd be to render Heidegger or Judith Butler!)

As for whether the election was "fraudulent," here's Yarvin's key passage:

> The fundamental purpose of a democratic election is to test the strength of the sides in a civil conflict, without anyone actually getting hurt. The majority wins because the strongest side would win … But this guess is much better if it actually measures humans who are both willing and able to walk down the street and show up. Anyone who cannot show up at the booth is unlikely to show up for the civil war. This is one of many reasons that an in-person election is a more  _accurate_ election. (If voters could be qualified by  _physique_ , it would be even more accurate) … My sense is that in many urban communities, voting by proxy in some sense is the norm. The people whose names are on the ballots really exist; and almost all of them actually did support China Joe. Or at least, preferred him. The extent to which they perform any tangible political action, including physically going to the booth, is very low; so is their engagement with the political system. They do not watch much CNN. The demand for records of their engagement is very high, because each such datum cancels out some huge, heavily-armed redneck with a bass boat. This is why, in the data, these cities look politics-obsessed, but photos of the polling places look empty. Most votes from these communities are in some sense “organized” … Whether or not such a design constitutes “fraud” is the judge’s  _de gustibus_.

Did you catch that? Somehow, Yarvin manages to insinuate that votes for Biden are plausibly fraudulent and plausibly shouldn't count--at least _if_ they were cast by mail, in "many urban communities" (which ones?), during a pandemic--even as Yarvin glaincingly acknowledges that the votes in question actually exist and are actually associated with Biden-preferring legal voters. This is gaslighting in pure, abstract form, unalloyed with the laughable claims about Hugo Chávez or Dominion Voting Systems.

What I find terrifying about gaslighting is that it's so _effective_. In response to this post, I'll again get long, erudite comments making the case that up is down, turkeys are mammals, and Trump won in a landslide. And simply to _read_ and _understand_ those comments, some part of me will need to entertain the idea that they might be right. Much like with Bigfoot theories, this will be purely a function of the effort the writers put in, not of any merit to the thesis.

And there's a second thing I find terrifying about gaslighting. Namely:**it turns me into an ally of the SneerClubbers.** Like them, I feel barely any space left for rational discussion or argument. Like them, I find it difficult to think of an appropriate response to Trumpian conspiracy theorists except to ridicule them, shame them as racists, and try to mute their influence. Notably, public shaming ("[t]he Trump stain, the stain of racism that you, William Hartmann and Monica Palmer, have covered yourself in, is going to follow you throughout history") [seems to have actually worked last week](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ebGOe2zHbLc) to get the Wayne County Board of Canvassers to back down and certify the votes from Detroit. So why not try more of it?

Of course, even if I agree with the wokeists that there's a line beyond which rational discussion can't reach, I radically disagree with them about the line's _whereabouts_. Here, for example, I try to draw mine generously enough to include any Republicans willing to stand up, however feebly, against the Trump cult, whereas the wokeists draw their line so narrowly as to exclude most _Democrats_ (!).

There's a more fundamental difference as well: the wokeists define their worldview in opposition to the patriarchy, the white male power structure, or whatever else is preventing utopia. I, taking inspiration from Huck, define my moral worldview in opposition to gaslighting itself, whatever its source, and in favor of acknowledging obvious realities (_especially_ realities about any harm we might be causing others). Thus, it's not just that I see no tension between opposing the excesses of the woke and opposing Trump's attempted _putsch_ --rather, it's that my opposition to both comes from exactly the same source. It's a source that, at least in me, often runs dry of courage, but I've found _Huck Finn_ to be helpful in replenishing it, and for that I'm grateful.

**Endnote:** There are, of course, many _actual_ security problems with the way we vote in the US, and there are computer scientists who've studied those problems for decades, rather than suddenly getting selectively interested in November 2020. If you're interested, see [this letter](https://josephhall.org/papers/Experts-Statement-on-the-US-2020-General-Election-16NOV2020-1057.pdf) ("Scientists say no credible evidence of computer fraud in the 2020 election outcome, but policymakers must work with experts to improve confidence"), which was signed by 59 of the leading figures in computer security, including Ron Rivest, Bruce Schneier, Hovav Shacham, Dan Wallach, Ed Felten, David Dill, and my childhood best friend Alex Halderman.

**Update:** I just noticed [this Twitter thread](https://twitter.com/seanmcarroll/status/1330573317627998208) by friend-of-the-blog Sean Carroll, which says a lot of what I was trying to say here.
