---
title: "Integrated Information Theory: Virgil Griffith opines"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Wed, 25 Jun 2014"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=1893"
---

Remember the [two](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=1799) [discussions](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=1823) about Integrated Information Theory that we had a month ago on this blog? You know, the ones where I argued that IIT fails because "the brain might be an expander, but not every expander is a brain"; where IIT inventor Giulio Tononi wrote a [14-page response](http://www.scottaaronson.com/tononi.docx) biting the bullet with mustard; and where famous philosopher of mind David Chalmers, and leading consciousness researcher (and IIT supporter) Christof Koch, also got involved in the [comments section](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=1823#comments)?

OK, so one more thing about that. Virgil Griffith recently completed his PhD under Christof Koch at Caltech--as he puts it, "immersing [him]self in the nitty-gritty of IIT for the past 6.5 years." This morning, Virgil sent me two striking letters about his thoughts on the recent IIT exchanges on this blog. He asked me to share them here, something that I'm more than happy to do:

  * [Virgil's first letter](http://www.scottaaronson.com/response-p1.pdf)
  * [Virgil's second letter](http://www.scottaaronson.com/response-p2.pdf)



Reading these letters, what jumped out at me--given Virgil's long apprenticeship in the heart of IIT-land--was the amount of _agreement_ between my views and his. In particular, Virgil agrees with my central contention that Φ, as it stands, can at most be a _necessary_ condition for consciousness, not a _sufficient_ condition, and remarks that "[t]o move IIT from talked about to accepted among hard scientists, it may be necessary for [Tononi] to wash his hands of sufficiency claims." He agrees that a lack of mathematical clarity in the definition of Φ is a "major problem in the IIT literature," commenting that "IIT needs more mathematically inclined people at its helm." He also says he agrees "110%" that the lack of a derivation of the form of Φ from IIT's axioms is "a pothole in the theory," and further agrees 110% that the current prescriptions for computing Φ contain many unjustified idiosyncrasies.

Indeed, given the level of agreement here, there's not all that much for me to rebut, defend, or clarify!

I suppose there are a few things.

  1. Just as a clarifying remark, in a few places where it looks from the formatting like Virgil is responding to something _I_ said (for example, "The conceptual structure is unified--it cannot be decomposed into independent components" and "Clearly, a theory of consciousness must be able to provide an adequate account for such seemingly disparate but largely uncontroversial facts"), he's actually responding to something _Giulio_ said (and that I, at most, quoted).
  2. Virgil says, correctly, that Giulio would respond to my central objection against IIT by challenging my "intuition for things being unconscious." (Indeed, because Giulio _did_ respond, there's no need to speculate about how he _would_ respond!) However, Virgil then goes on to explicate Giulio's response using the analogy of temperature (interestingly, the same analogy _I_ used for a different purpose). He points out how counterintuitive it would be for Kelvin's contemporaries to accept that "even the coldest thing you've touched actually has substantial heat in it," and remarks: "I find this 'Kelvin scale for C' analogy makes the panpsychism much more palatable." The trouble is that I never objected to IIT's panpsychism _per se_ : I only objected to its seemingly _arbitrary and selective_ panpsychism. It's one thing for a theory to ascribe some amount of consciousness to a 2D grid or an expander graph. It's quite another for a theory to ascribe _vastly more_ consciousness to those things than it ascribes to a human brain--even while denying consciousness to things that are intuitively similar but organized a little differently (say, a 1D grid). A better analogy here would be if Kelvin's theory of temperature had predicted, not merely that all ordinary things had some heat in them, but that  _an ice cube was hotter than the Sun_ , even though a popsicle was, of course, colder than the Sun. (The ice cube, you see, "integrates heat" in a way that the popsicle doesn't…)
  3. Virgil imagines two ways that an IIT proponent could respond to my argument involving the cerebellum--the argument that accuses IIT proponents of changing the rules of the game according to convenience (a 2D grid has a large Φ? suck it up and accept it; your intuitions about a grid's lack of consciousness are irrelevant. the human cerebellum has a small Φ? ah, _that 's_ a victory for IIT, since the cerebellum is intuitively unconscious). The trouble is that both of Virgil's imagined responses are by reference to the IIT axioms. But I wasn't talking about the axioms themselves, but about whether we're allowed to _validate_ the axioms, by checking their consequences against earlier, pre-theoretic intuitions. And I was pointing out that Giulio seemed happy to do so when the results "went in IIT's favor" (in the cerebellum example), even though he lectured me against doing so in the cases of the expander and the 2D grid (cases where IIT does less well, to put it mildly, at capturing our intuitions).
  4. Virgil chastises me for ridiculing Giulio's phenomenological argument for the consciousness of a 2D grid by way of nursery rhymes: "Just because it feels like something to see a wall, doesn't mean it feels like something to be a wall. You can smell a rose, and the rose can smell good, but that doesn't mean the rose can smell you." Virgil amusingly comments: "Even when both are inebriated, I've never heard [Giulio] nor [Christof] separately or collectively imply anything like this. Moreover, they're each far too clueful to fall for something so trivial." For my part, I agree that neither Giulio nor Christof would ever advocate something as transparently silly as, "if you have a rich inner experience when thinking about X, then that's evidence X itself is conscious." And I apologize if I seemed to suggest they would. To clarify, my point was not that Giulio was making such an absurd statement, but rather that, assuming he wasn't, _I didn 't know what he **was** trying to say in the passages of his that I'd just quoted at length._ The silly thing seemed like the "obvious" reading of his words, and my hermeneutic powers were unequal to the task of figuring out the non-silly, non-obvious reading that he surely intended.



Anyway, there's much more to Virgil's letters than the above--including answers to some of my subsidiary questions about the details of IIT (e.g., how to handle unbalanced partitions, and the mathematical meanings of terms like "mechanism" and "system of mechanisms"). Also, in parts of the letters, Virgil's main concern is neither to agree with me nor to agree with Giulio, but rather to offer his own ideas, developed in the course of his PhD work, for how to move forward and fix some of the problems with IIT. All in all, these are recommended reads for anyone who's been following this debate.
