---
title: "ITCS’2018"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Wed, 05 Jul 2017"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=3322"
---

_My friend Anna Karlin, who chairs the ITCS program committee this year, asked me to post the following announcement, and I 'm happy to oblige her.  I've enjoyed ITCS every time I've attended, and was even involved in the [statement](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=315) that led to ITCS's creation, although I don't take direct responsibility for the content of this ad. -SA_

* * *

**The[ITCS 2018 Call For Papers](http://itcs-conf.org/itcs18/itcs18-cfp.html) is now available!**

ITCS is a conference that stands apart from all others. For a decade now, it has been celebrating the vibrancy and unity of our field of Theoretical Computer Science. See this [blog post](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=2849) for a detailed discussion of what makes ITCS so cool and the brief description of ITCS’17 at the end of this post.

ITCS seeks to promote research that carries a strong conceptual message  (e.g., introducing a new concept, model or understanding, opening a new line of inquiry within traditional or interdisciplinary areas, introducing new mathematical techniques and methodologies, or new applications of known techniques). ITCS welcomes both conceptual and technical contributions whose contents will advance and inspire the greater theory community.

This year, ITCS will be held at MIT in Cambridge, MA from January 11-14, 2018.

The **submission deadline**  is** September 8, 2017**, with notification of decisions by October 30, 2017.

** ** Authors should strive to make their papers accessible not only to experts in their subarea, but also to the theory community at large. The committee will place a premium on writing that conveys clearly and in the simplest possible way what the paper is accomplishing.

Ten-page versions of accepted papers will be published in an electronic proceedings of the conference. However, the alternative of publishing a one page abstract with a link to a full PDF will also be available (to accommodate subsequent publication in journals that would not consider results that have been published in preliminary form in a conference proceedings).

**You can find all the details in the[official Call For Papers](http://itcs-conf.org/itcs18/itcs18-cfp.html).**

** **_On last year’s ITCS (by the PC Chair Christos Papadimitriou)_

** ** This [past ITCS (2017) ](http://itcs-conf.org/itcs17/itcs17-info.html)was by all accounts the most successful ever.  We had 170+ submissions and 61 papers, including 5 "invited papers", and 90+ registrants, all new records.  There was a voluntary poster session for authors to get a chance to go through more detail, and the famous Graduating Bits event, where the younger ones get their 5 minutes to show off their accomplishment and personality.

The spirit of the conference was invigorating, heartwarming, and great fun.  I believe none of the twelve sessions had fewer than 70 attendees -- no parallelism, of course -- while the now famous last session was among the best attended and went one hour overtime due to the excitement of discussion (compare with the last large conference that you attended).
