---
title: "Martinis, The Plot Against America, Kill Chain"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Thu, 23 Apr 2020"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=4772"
---

**Update (May 1):** Check out [this Forbes interview](https://www.forbes.com/sites/moorinsights/2020/04/30/googles-top-quantum-scientist-explains-in-detail-why-he-resigned/#734cf7cb6983), where Martinis explains his reasons for leaving Google in much more detail.

As if we didn't have enough to worry us, this week brought the [sad news](https://www.wired.com/story/googles-head-quantum-computing-hardware-resigns/) that John Martinis, who for five years was the leader and public face of Google's experimental quantum computing effort, has quit Google and returned to his earlier post at UC Santa Barbara. I've spoken about what happened both with John and with Hartmut Neven, the head of Google's Quantum AI Lab. Without betraying confidences, or asserting anything that either side would disagree with, I think I can say that it came down to a difference in management philosophies. Google tends to be consensus-driven, whereas John is of the view that building a million-qubit, error-corrected quantum computer will take more decisive leadership. I can add: I'd often wondered how John had time to travel the world, giving talks about quantum supremacy, while also managing the lab's decisions on a day-to-day basis. It looks now like I was right to wonder! Potential analogies flood the mind: is this like a rock band that breaks up right after its breakout hit? Is it like Steve Jobs leaving Apple? Anyway, I wish the Google team the best in John's absence, and I also wish John the best with whatever he does next.

I was never big on HBO (e.g., I still haven't seen a single minute of _Game of Thrones_), but in the last couple of weeks, Dana and I found ourselves watching two absolutely compelling HBO shows--one a fictional miniseries and the other a documentary, but both on the theme of the fragility of American democracy.

[_The Plot Against America_](https://www.hbo.com/the-plot-against-america), based on the [2004 Philip Roth novel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Plot_Against_America) of the same name (which Dana read and which I now plan to read), is about an alternate history where the aviator Charles Lindbergh defeats FDR in the 1940 presidential election, on a fascist and isolationist platform, in events that--as countless people have pointed out--are eerily, terrifyingly prescient of what would actualy befall the US in 2016. The series follows a Jewish insurance salesman and his family in Newark, NJ--isn't that what it always is with Philip Roth?--as they try to cope with the country's gradual, all-too-plausible slide downward, from the genteel antisemitism that already existed in _our_ timeline's 1940 all the way to riots, assassinations, and pogroms (although never to an American Holocaust). One of the series' final images is of paper ballots, in a rematch presidential election, being carted away and burned, underscoring just how much depends here on the mundane machinery of democracy.

Which brings me to [_Kill Chain: The Cyber War on America 's Elections_](https://www.hbo.com/documentaries/kill-chain-the-cyber-war-on-americas-elections), a documentary about the jaw-droppingly hackable electronic voting machines used in US elections and the fight to do something about them. The show mostly follows the journey of [Harri Hursti](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harri_Hursti), a Finnish-born programmer who's made this issue his life's work, but it also extensively features my childhood best friend [Alex Halderman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alex_Halderman). OK, but isn't this a theoretical issue, one that (perhaps rightly) exercises security nerds like Alex, but surely hasn't changed the outcomes of actual elections?

Yeah, so about that. You know Brian Kemp, the doofus governor of Georgia, who's infamously announced plans to reopen the state right away, ignoring the pleading of public health experts--a act that will fill Georgia's ICUs and morgues as surely as night follows day? And you know how Kemp defeated the Democrat, Stacey Abrams, by a razor-thin margin, in a 2018 election of which Kemp himself was the overseer? It turns out that Kemp's office distributed defective memory cards to African-American and Democratic precincts, though not to white and Republican ones. There's also striking statistical evidence that at least some voting machines were hacked, although because there was no paper trail it can never be proved.

In short, what _The Plot Against America_ and _Kill Chain_ have in common is that they _would be_ desperately needed warnings about the ease with which democracy could collapse in the US, except for the detail that much of what they warn about has already happened, and now it's not clear how we get back.
