---
title: "On Guilt"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Thu, 10 Jun 2021"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=5542"
---

The other night Dana and I watched ["The Internet's Own Boy,"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9vz06QO3UkQ) the 2014 documentary about the life and work of [Aaron Swartz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aaron_Swartz), which I'd somehow missed when it came out. Swartz, for anyone who doesn't remember, was the child prodigy who helped create RSS and Reddit, who then became a campaigner for an open Internet, who was arrested for using a laptop in an MIT supply closet to download millions of journal articles and threatened with decades in prison, and who then committed suicide at age 26. I regret that I never knew Swartz, though he did once send me a fan email about _Quantum Computing Since Democritus_.

Say whatever you want about the tactical wisdom or the legality of Swartz's actions; it seems inarguable to me that he was _morally_ correct, that certain categories of information (e.g. legal opinions and taxpayer-funded scientific papers) need to be made freely available, and that sooner or later our civilization will catch up to Swartz and regard his position as completely obvious. The beautifully-made documentary filled me with rage and guilt not only that the world had failed Swartz, but that I personally had failed him.

At the time of Swartz's arrest, prosecution, and suicide, I was an MIT CS professor who'd previously [written](https://www.scottaaronson.com/writings/journal.html) in strong support of open access to scientific literature, and who had the platform of this blog. Had I understood what was going on with Swartz--had I _taken the time to find out_ what was going on--I could have been in a good position to help organize a grassroots campaign to pressure the MIT administration to urge prosecutors to drop the case (like JSTOR had already done), which could plausibly have made a difference. As it was, I was preoccupied in those years with BosonSampling, getting married, etc., I didn't bother to learn whether anything was being done or _could_ be done about the Aaron Swartz matter, and then before I knew it, Swartz had joined Alan Turing in computer science's pantheon of lost geniuses.

But maybe there was something deeper to my inaction. If I'd strongly defended the substance of what Swartz had done, it would've raised the question: _why wasn 't I doing the same?_ Why was I merely complaining about paywalled journals from the comfort of my professor's office, rather than putting my own freedom on the line like Swartz was? It was as though I _had_ to put some psychological distance between myself and the situation, in order to justify my life choices to myself.

Even though I see the error in that way of "thinking," it keeps recurring, keeps causing me to make choices that I feel guilt or at least regret about later. In February 2020, there were a few smart people saying that a new viral pneumonia from Wuhan was about to upend life on earth, but the people around me certainly weren't _acting_ that way, and _I_ wasn't acting that way either … and so, "for the sake of internal consistency," I didn't spend much time thinking about it or investigating it. After all, if the fears of a global pandemic had a good chance of being true, I should be dropping everything else and panicking, shouldn't I? But I _wasn 't_ dropping everything else and panicking … so how could the fears be true?

Then I [publicly repented](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=4695), and resolved not to make such an error again. And now, 15 months later, I realize that I _have_ made such an error again.

All throughout the pandemic, I'd ask my friends, privately, why the hypothesis that the virus had accidentally leaked from the Wuhan Institute of Virology wasn't being taken far more seriously, given what seemed like a shockingly strong _prima facie_ case. But I didn't discuss the lab leak scenario on this blog, except once in passing. I could _say_ I didn't discuss it because I'm not a virologist and I had nothing new to contribute. But I worry that I also didn't discuss it because it seemed incompatible with my self-conception as a cautious scientist who's skeptical of lurid coverups and conspiracies--and because I'd already spent my "weirdness capital" on other issues, and didn't relish the prospect of being sneered at on social media yet again. Instead I simply waited for discussion of the lab leak hypothesis to become "safe" and "respectable," as today it finally has, thanks to writers who were more courageous than I was. I became, basically, another sheep in one of the conformist herds that we rightly despise when we read about them in history.

(For all that, it's still plausible to me that the virus had a natural origin after all. What's become clear is simply that, _even if so_ , the failure to take the possibility of a lab escape more seriously back when the trail of evidence was fresher will stand as a major intellectual scandal of our time.)

Sometimes people are wracked with guilt, but over completely different things than the world _wants_ them to be wracked with guilt over. This was one of the great lessons that I learned from reading Richard Rhodes's _[The Making of the Atomic Bomb](https://www.amazon.com/Making-Atomic-Bomb-Richard-Rhodes/dp/1451677618)_. Many of the Manhattan Project physicists felt lifelong guilt, _not_ that they'd participated in building the bomb, but only that they hadn't _finished_ the bomb by 1943, when it could have ended the war in Europe and the Holocaust.

On a much smaller scale, I suppose some readers would still like me to feel guilt about comment 171, or some of the other stuff I wrote about nerds, dating, and feminism … or if not that, then maybe about my defense of a two-state solution for Israel and Palestine, or of standardized tests and accelerated math programs, or maybe my vehement condemnation of Trump and his failed insurrection. Or any of the dozens of other times when I stood up and said something I actually believed, or when I recounted my experiences as accurately as I could. The truth is, though, I don't.

Looking back--which, now that I'm 40, I confess is an increasingly large fraction of my time--the pattern seems consistent. I feel guilty, not for having stood up for what I strongly believed in, but for having _failed_ to do so. This suggests that, if I want fewer regrets, then I should click "Publish" on more potentially controversial posts! I don't know how to force myself to do that, but maybe this post itself is a step.
