---
title: "On keeping a packed suitcase"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Sat, 01 Nov 2025"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=9285"
---

**Update (Nov. 6):** I've closed the comments, as they crossed the threshold from "sometimes worthwhile" to "purely abusive." As for Mamdani's victory: as I like to say in such cases (and said, e.g., after George W. Bush's and Trump's victories), the silver lining to which I cling is that _either_ I'll be pleasantly surprised, and things won't be quite as terrible as I expect, or _else_ I'll be vindicated.

* * *

This Halloween, I didn't need anything special to frighten me. I walked all day around in a haze of fear and depression, unable to concentrate on my research or anything else. I saw people smiling, dressed up in costumes, and I thought: _how?_

The president of the Heritage Foundation, the most important right-wing think tank in the United States, has now [explicitly aligned himself](https://www.politico.com/news/2025/10/30/heritage-tucker-carlson-nick-fuentes-00631200?nid=00000170-c000-da87-af78-e185fa700000&nname=politico-nightly&nrid=00000161-e5bf-d02b-a56b-e5bfa0940000) with Tucker Carlson, even as the latter has become a full-on Holocaust-denying Hitler-loving antisemite, who nods in agreement with the openly neo-Nazi Nick Fuentes. Meanwhile, Vice President J.D. Vance--i.e., plausibly the next President of the United States--pointedly [did nothing whatsoever](https://www.jpost.com/diaspora/antisemitism/article-872276) to distance himself from the MAGA movement's lunatic antisemites, in response to their lunatic antisemitic questions at the Turning Point USA conference. (Vance thus dishonored the memory of Charlie Kirk, who for all my many disagreements with him, was a firmly committed Zionist.) It's become undeniable that, once Trump himself leaves the stage, this _is_ the future of MAGA, and hence of the Republican Party itself. Exactly as I warned would happen a decade ago, this __ is what’s crawled out from underneath the rock that Trump gleefully overturned.

While the Republican Party is being swallowed by a movement that holds that Jews like me have no place in America, the Democratic Party is being swallowed by a movement that holds that Jews have no place in Israel. If these two movements ever merged, the obvious "compromise" would be the belief, popular throughout history, that Jews have no place anywhere on earth.

Barring a miracle, New York City--home to the world's second-largest Jewish community--is about to be led by a man for whom eradicating the Jewish state is his deepest, most fundamental moral imperative, besides of course the proletariat seizing the means of production. And to their eternal shame, something like 29% of New York's Jews are actually going to vote for this man, believing that their own collaboration with evil will somehow protect them personally--in breathtaking ignorance of the millennia of Jewish history testifying to the opposite.

Despite what you might think, I try _really, really hard_ not to hyperventilate or overreact. I know that, even if I lived in literal Warsaw in 1939, it would still be incumbent on me to assess the situation calmly and figure out the best response.

So for whatever it's worth: no, I don't expect that American Jews, even pro-Zionist Jews in New York City, will need to flee their homes just yet. But it does seem to me that they (to say nothing of British and Canadian and French Jews) might, so to speak, want to keep their suitcases packed by the door, as Jews have through the centuries in analogous situations. As Tevye says near the end of _Fiddler on the Roof_ , when the Jews are given three days to evacuate Anatevka: "maybe _this_ is why we always keep our hats on." Diaspora Jews like me might also want to brush up on Hebrew. We can thank Hashem or the Born Rule that, this time around, at least the State of Israel exists (despite the bloodthirsty wish of half the world that it cease to exist), and we can reflect that these contingencies are _precisely_ why Israel was created.

* * *

Let me make something clear: I don't focus so much on antisemitism _only_ because of parochial concern for the survival of my own kids, although I freely admit to having as much such concern as the next person. Instead, I do so because I hold with David Deutsch that, in Western civilization, antisemitism has for millennia been the inevitable endpoint toward which _every_ bad idea ultimately tends. It's the universal bad idea. It's bad-idea-complete. Antisemitism is the purest possible expression of the worldview of the pitchfork-wielding peasant, who blames shadowy elites for his own failures in life, and who dreams in his resentment and rage of reversing the moral and scientific progress of humanity by slaughtering all those responsible for it. Hatred of high-achieving Chinese and Indian immigrants, and of gifted programs and standardized testing, are other expressions of the same worldview.

As far as I know, in 3,000 years, there hasn't been a single example--not one--of an antisemitic regime of which one could honestly say: "fine, but once you look past what they did to the Jews, they were great for everyone else!" Philosemitism is no guarantee of general goodness (as we see for example with Trump), but antisemitism pretty much _does_ guarantee general awfulness. That's because antisemitism is not merely a hatred, but an entire false theory of how the world works--not just _a_ but _the_ conspiracy theory--and as such, it necessarily prevents its believers from figuring out true explanations for society's problems.

* * *

I'd better end a post like this on a note of optimism. Yes, every single time I check my phone, I'm assaulted with twenty fresh examples of once-respected people and institutions, all across the political spectrum, who've now fallen to the brain virus, and started blaming all the world's problems on "bloodsucking globalists" or George Soros or Jeffrey Epstein or AIPAC or some other suspicious stand-in _du jour_. (The deepest cuts come from the new Jew-haters who I myself once knew, or admired, or had some friendly correspondence with.)

But also, every time I venture out into the real world, I meet twenty people of all backgrounds whose brains still seem perfectly healthy, and who respond to events in a normal human way. Even in the dark world behind the screen, I can find dozens of righteous condemnations of Zohran Mamdani and Tucker Carlson and the Heritage Foundation and the others who've chosen to play footsie with those seeking a new Final Solution to the Jewish Question. So I reflect that, for all the battering it's taken in this age of TikTok and idiocracy--even then, our Enlightenment civilization still has a few antibodies that are able to put up a fight.

In their beautiful book _[Abundance](https://www.amazon.com/Abundance-Progress-Takes-Ezra-Klein/dp/1668023482)_ , Ezra Klein and Derek Thompson set out an ambitious agenda by which the Democratic Party could reinvent itself and defeat MAGA, not by indulging conspiracy theories but by creating actual broad prosperity. Their agenda is full of items like: legalizing the construction of more housing where people actually want to live; repealing the laws that let random busybodies block the construction of mass transit; building out renewable energy and nuclear; investing in science and technology … basically, doing all the things that anyone with any ounce of economic literacy knows to be good. The abundance agenda isn't only righteous and smart: for all I know, it might even turn out to be _popular_. It's clearly worth a try.

Last week I was amused to see Kate Willett and Briahna Joy Gray, two of the loudest voices of the conspiratorial far left, [denounce](https://www.reddit.com/r/LivestreamFail/comments/1o78e4z/briahna_joy_gray_and_kate_willett_a_lot_of/) the abundance agenda as … wait for it … a cover for Zionism. As far as they're concerned, the only reason why anyone would talk about affordable housing or high-speed rail is to distract the masses from the evil Zionists murdering Palestinian babies in order to harvest their organs.

The more I thought about this, the more I realized that Willett and Gray actually have a point. Yes, solving America's problems with reason and hard work and creativity, like the abundance agenda says to do, _is_ the diametric opposite of blaming all the problems on the perfidy of Jews or some other scapegoat. The two approaches _really are_ the logical endpoints of two directly competing visions of reality.

Naturally I have a preference between those visions. So I've been on a bit of a spending spree lately, in support of sane, moderate, pro-abundance, anti-MAGA, liberal Enlightenment forces retaking America. I donated $1000 to [Alex Bores](https://www.alexbores.nyc/), who's running for Congress in NYC, and who besides being a moderate Democrat who favors all the usual good things, is _also_ a leader in AI safety legislation. (For more, see [this](https://ericneyman.wordpress.com/2025/10/20/consider-donating-to-alex-bores-author-of-the-raise-act/) by Eric Neyman of Alignment Research Center, or [this](https://www.astralcodexten.com/p/tech-pacs-are-closing-in-on-the-almonds) from Scott Alexander himself--the AI alignment community has been pretty wowed.) I also donated $1000 to [Scott Wiener](https://www.scottwiener.com/), who's running for Nancy Pelosi's seat in California, has a nuanced pro-two-states, anti-Netanyahu position that causes him to get heckled as a genocidal Zionist, and authored the excellent [SB1047](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=8269) AI safety bill, which Gavin Newsom unfortunately vetoed for short-term political reasons. And I donated $1000 to [Vikki Goodwin](https://www.vikkigoodwin.com/), a sane Democrat who's running to unseat Lieutenant Governor Dan Patrick in my own state of Texas. Any other American office-seeker who resonates with this post, and who'd like a donation, can feel free to contact me as well.

My bag is packed … but for now, only for a brief trip to give the physics colloquium at Harvard, after which I'll return back home to Austin. Until it becomes impossible, I call on my thousands of thoughtful, empathetic American readers to stay right where you are, and simply do your best to fight the brain-eaten zombies of both left and right. If you _are_ one of the zombies, of course, then my calling you one doesn't even begin to express my contempt: may you be remembered by history alongside the willing dupes of Hitler, Stalin, and Mao. May the good guys prevail.

Oh, and speaking of zombies, Happy Halloween everyone! Boooooooo!
