---
title: "On two blog posts of Jerry Coyne"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Sat, 13 Jul 2019"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=4253"
---

A few months ago, I got to know [Jerry Coyne](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jerry_Coyne), the recently-retired biologist at the University of Chicago who writes the blog ["Why Evolution Is True."](https://whyevolutionistrue.wordpress.com/) The interaction started when Jerry put up a [bemused post about my thoughts on predictability and free will](https://whyevolutionistrue.wordpress.com/2019/01/15/a-computer-scientist-finds-the-question-of-free-will-uninteresting-for-bad-reasons/), and I pointed out that if he wanted to engage me on those topics, there was [more to go on](https://www.scottaaronson.com/papers/giqtm3.pdf) than an 8-minute YouTube video. I told Coyne that it would be a shame to get off on the wrong foot with him, since perusal of his blog made it obvious that whatever he and I disputed, it was dwarfed by our areas of agreement. He and I exchanged more emails and had lunch in Chicago.

By way of explaining how he hadn't read ["The Ghost in the Quantum Turing Machine,"](https://www.scottaaronson.com/papers/giqtm3.pdf) Coyne emphasized the difference in my and his turnaround times: while these days I update my blog only a couple times per month, Coyne often updates multiple times per _day_. Indeed the sheer volume of material he posts, on subjects from biology to culture wars to [Chicago hot dogs](https://whyevolutionistrue.wordpress.com/2019/02/27/the-chicago-hot-dog-museum-and-our-wonderful-hot-dogs/), would take months to absorb.

Today, though, I want to comment on just two posts of Jerry's.

The [first post](https://whyevolutionistrue.wordpress.com/2019/05/17/computer-scientist-david-gelertner-drinks-the-academic-kool-aid-buys-into-intelligent-design/), from back in May, concerns [David Gelernter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Gelernter), the computer science professor at Yale who was infamously injured in a 1993 attack by the Unabomber, and who's now mainly known as a right-wing commentator. I don't know Gelernter, though I did once attend a small interdisciplinary workshop in the south of France that Gelernter also attended, wherein I gave a talk about quantum computing and computational complexity in which Gelernter showed no interest. Anyway, Gelernter, in an [essay in May for the _Claremont Review of Books_](https://www.claremont.org/crb/article/giving-up-darwin/), argued that recent work has definitively disproved Darwinism as a mechanism for generating new species, and until something better comes along, Intelligent Design is the best available alternative.

Curiously, I think that Gelernter's argument falls flat not for detailed reasons of biology, but mostly just because it indulges in _bad math and computer science_ --in fact, in precisely the sorts of arguments that I was trying to answer in [my segment on Morgan Freeman's ](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=1487)_[Through the Wormhole](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=1487)_ (see also Section 3.2 of [Why Philosophers Should Care About Computational Complexity](https://www.scottaaronson.com/papers/philos.pdf)). Gelernter says that

  1. a random change to an amino acid sequence will pretty much always make it worse,
  2. the probability of finding a useful new such sequence by picking one at random is at most ~1 in 1077, and
  3. there have only been maybe ~1040 organisms in earth's history.



Since 1077 >> 1040, Darwinism is thereby refuted--not in principle, but as an explanation for life on earth. QED. 

The most glaring hole in the above argument, it seems to me, is that it simply ignores _intermediate_ possible numbers of mutations. How hard would it be to change, not 1 or 100, but 5 amino acids in a given protein to get a usefully different one--as might happen, for example, with local optimization methods like simulated annealing run at nonzero temperature? And how many chances were there for _that_ kind of mutation in the earth's history?

Gelernter can't personally see how a path could cut through the exponentially large solution space in a polynomial amount of time, so he asserts that it's impossible. Many of the would-be P≠NP provers who email me every week do the same. But this particular kind of "argument from incredulity" has an abysmal track record: it would've applied equally well, for example, to problems like maximum matching that turned out to have efficient algorithms. This is why, in CS, we demand better evidence of hardness--like completeness results or black-box lower bounds--neither of which seem however to apply to the case at hand. Surely Gelernter understands all this, but had he not, he could've learned it from my lecture at the workshop in France!

Alas, online debate, as it's wont to do, focused less on Gelernter's actual arguments and the problems with them, than on the tiresome questions of "standing" and "status." In particular: does Gelernter's authority, as a noted computer science professor, somehow lend new weight to Intelligent Design? Or conversely: does the very fact that a computer scientist endorsed ID prove that computer science itself isn't a real science at all, and that its practitioners should never be taken seriously in any statements about the real world?

It's hard to say which of these two questions makes me want to bury my face deeper into my hands. [Serge Lang](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serge_Lang), the famous mathematician and textbook author, spent much of his later life fervently denying the connection between HIV and AIDS. [Lynn Margulis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lynn_Margulis), the discoverer of the origin of mitochondria (and Carl Sagan's first wife), died a 9/11 truther. What broader lesson should we draw from any of this? And anyway, what percentage of computer scientists actually do doubt evolution, and how does it compare to the percentage in other academic fields and other professions? Isn't the question of how divorced we computer scientists are from the real world an … ahem … **empirical** matter, one hard to answer on the basis of armchair certainties and anecdotes?

Speaking of empiricism, if you check Gelernter's [publication list on DBLP](https://dblp.uni-trier.de/pers/hd/g/Gelernter:David) and his [Google Scholar page](https://scholar.google.ca/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C5&q=david+gelernter&btnG=&oq=david+geler), you'll find that he did influential work in programming languages, parallel computing, and other areas from 1981 through 1997, and then in the past 22 years published a grand total of … **two** papers in computer science. One with four coauthors, the other a review/perspective piece about his earlier work. So it seems fair to say that, some time after receiving tenure in a CS department, Gelernter pivoted (to put it mildly) away from CS and toward conservative punditry. His recent offerings, in case you're curious, include the book [America-Lite: How Imperial Academia Dismantled Our Culture (and Ushered In the Obamacrats)](https://www.amazon.com/America-Lite-Imperial-Academia-Dismantled-Obamacrats/dp/1594036063/ref=sr_1_1?keywords=david+gelernter&qid=1563047627&s=gateway&sr=8-1).

Some will claim that this case underscores what's wrong with the tenure system itself, while others will reply that it's precisely what tenure was designed for, even if in this instance you happen to disagree with what Gelernter uses his tenured freedom to say. The point I wanted to make is different, though. It's that the question "what kind of a field is computer science, anyway, that a guy can do high-level CS research on Monday, and then on Tuesday reject Darwinism and unironically use the word 'Obamacrat'?"--well, even if I accepted the immense weight this question places on one atypical example (which I don't), and even if I dismissed the power of compartmentalization (which I again don't), the question _still_ wouldn't arise in Gelernter's case, since getting from "Monday" to "Tuesday" seems to have taken him 15+ years.

Anyway, the second post of Coyne's that I wanted to talk about is [from just yesterday](https://whyevolutionistrue.wordpress.com/2019/07/12/tarring-steve-pinker-and-others-with-jeffrey-epstein/), and is about Jeffrey Epstein--the financier, science philanthropist, and confessed sex offender, whose appalling crimes you’ll have read all about this week if you weren't on a long sea voyage without Internet or something.

For the benefit of my many fair-minded friends on Twitter, I should clarify that I've never met Jeffrey Epstein, let alone accepted any private flights to his sex island or whatever. I doubt he has any clue who I am either—even if he did once claim to be [“intrigued”](https://web.archive.org/web/20101112131000/http://www.jeffreyepsteinscience.com/2010/10/the-value-of-quantum-computing-to-jeffrey-epstein/) by quantum information.

I do know a few of the scientists who Epstein once hung out with, including Seth Lloyd and Steven Pinker. Pinker, in particular, is now facing vociferous attacks on Twitter, similar in magnitude perhaps to what I faced in the comment-171 affair, for having been photographed next to Epstein at a 2014 luncheon that was hosted by Lawrence Krauss (a physicist who later faced sexual harassment allegations of his own). By the evidentiary standards of social media, this photo suffices to convict Pinker as basically a child molester himself, and is _also_ a devastating refutation of any data that Pinker might have adduced in his books about the Enlightenment's contributions to human flourishing.

From my standpoint, what's surprising is not that Pinker is up against this, but that it _took this long_ to happen, given that Pinker's pro-Enlightenment, anti-blank-slate views have had the effect of painting a giant red target on his back. Despite the near-inevitability, though, you can't blame Pinker for wanting to defend himself, as I did when it was my turn for the struggle session.

Thus, in response to an emailed inquiry by Jerry Coyne, Pinker shared some detailed reflections about Epstein; Pinker then gave Coyne permission to post those reflections on his blog (though they were originally meant for Coyne only). Like everything Pinker writes, they’re [worth reading in full](https://whyevolutionistrue.wordpress.com/2019/07/12/tarring-steve-pinker-and-others-with-jeffrey-epstein/). Here’s the opening paragraph:

> The annoying irony is that I could never stand the guy [Epstein], never took research funding from him, and always tried to keep my distance. Friends and colleagues described him to me as a quantitative genius and a scientific sophisticate, and they invited me to salons and coffee klatches at which he held court. But I found him to be a kibitzer and a dilettante — he would abruptly change the subject ADD style, dismiss an observation with an adolescent wisecrack, and privilege his own intuitions over systematic data.

Pinker goes on to discuss his record of celebrating, and extensively documenting, the forces of modernity that led to dramatic reductions in violence against women and that have the power to continue doing so. On Twitter, Pinker had [already written](https://twitter.com/sapinker/status/1149154274787627010): "Needless to say I condemn Epstein's crimes in the strongest terms."

I probably should’ve predicted that Pinker would then be attacked again—this time, for having prefaced his condemnation with the phrase "needless to say." The argument, as best I can follow, runs like this: given all the isms of which woke Twitter has already convicted Pinker--scientism, neoliberalism, biological determinism, etc.--how could Pinker's being against Epstein's crimes (which we recently learned probably include the [rape](https://www.cnn.com/videos/us/2019/07/10/jeffrey-epstein-accuser-speaks-out-today-show-nbc-intv-sot-newday-vpx.cnn), and not only statutorily, of a 15-year-old) _possibly_ be assumed as a given?

For the record, just as Epstein's friends and enablers weren't confined to one party or ideology, so the public condemnation of Epstein strikes me as a matter that is (or should be) beyond ideology, with all reasonable dispute now confined to the space between "very bad" and "extremely bad," between "lock away for years" and "lock away for life."

While I didn’t need Pinker to tell me _that_ , one reason I personally appreciated his comments is that they helped to answer a question that had bugged me, and that none of the mountains of other condemnations of Epstein had given me a clear sense about. Namely: supposing, hypothetically, that I’d met Epstein around 2002 or so—without, of course, knowing about his crimes—would I have been as taken with him as many other academics seem to have been? (Would _you_ have been? How sure are you?)

Over the last decade, I've had the opportunity to meet some titans and semi-titans of finance and business, to discuss quantum computing and other nerdy topics. For a few (by no means all) of these titans, my overriding impression was _precisely_ their unwillingness to concentrate on any one point for more than about 20 seconds--as though they wanted the crust of a deep intellectual exchange without the meat filling. My experience with them fit Pinker's description of Epstein to a T (though I hasten to add that, as far as I know, none of these others ran teenage sex rings).

Anyway, given all the anger at Pinker for having intersected with Epstein, it's ironic that I could easily imagine Pinker's comments rattling Epstein the most of anyone's, if Epstein hears of them from his prison cell. It's like: Epstein must have developed a skin like a rhinoceros's by this point about being called a child abuser, a creep, and a thousand similar (and similarly deserved) epithets. But "a kibitzer and a dilettante" who merely lured famous intellectuals into his living room, with wads of cash not entirely unlike the ones used to lure teenage girls to his massage table? Ouch!

OK, but what about Alan Dershowitz—the man who apparently used to be Epstein’s close friend, who still is Pinker’s friend, and who played a crucial role in securing Epstein’s 2008 plea bargain, the one now condemned as a travesty of justice? I'm not sure how I feel about Dershowitz.  It's like: I understand that our system requires attorneys willing to mount a vociferous defense even for clients who they privately know or believe to be guilty—and even to get those clients off on technicalities or bargaining whenever they can.  I'm also incredibly grateful that I chose CS rather than law school, because I don't think I could last an hour advocating causes that I knew to be unjust. Just like my fellow CS professor, the intelligent design advocate David Gelernter, I have the privilege and the burden of speaking only for myself.
