---
title: "Please cheer me up"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Fri, 27 Aug 2021"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=5769"
---

  
**Update:** Come to think of it, let’s circle back to the thing about kids under 13 getting banned from taking the SAT, as a ridiculous unintended consequence of some federal regulation. I wonder whether this is a campaign this blog could spearhead that would have **an actual chance of making a positive difference in the world (!!)** , rather than just giving me space to express myself, to vent my impotent rage at the tragic failures of our civilization and the blankfaces who sleep soundly despite knowing that they caused those failures.  What if, like, a whole bunch of us wrote to the College Board, or whatever federal agency enforces the regulation that the College Board is worried about, and we asked them whether a solution might be found in which parents gave permission on the web form for their under-13s to take the SAT, given how memorable this opportunity was for many of us, how it was a nerd rite of passage, and how surely none of us have any wish to deny that opportunity to the next generation, so let’s work together to solve this?

* * *

I'm depressed that, all over the world, the values of the Enlightenment are humiliated and in retreat, while the values of the Taliban are triumphant. The literal Taliban of course, but also a thousand mini-Talibans of every flavor, united in their ideological certainty.

I'm depressed that now and for the future, the image of the United States before the world--_deservedly_ so--is one of desperate Afghans plunging to their deaths from the last airplanes out of Kabul. I'm depressed that, while this historic calamity was set in motion by Donald Trump, the president who bears direct, immediate moral responsibility for it is the one I voted for. And knowing what I know now, I'd _still_ have voted for him--but with an ashen face.

I'm depressed that, on social media, the same people who seven years ago floridly denounced me, because, while explaining how as a young person I overcame the urge to suicide and finally achieved some semblance of a normal life, I made a passing reference to a vanished culture of arranged marriages, to which I seemed better-adapted than to the world of today--these very same people are the ones sagely resigned to millions of Afghan women and girls _actually_ forced into unwanted marriages, tortured, and raped, who explain that there's nothing the US can or should do about this, even that it was folly to imagine we could impose parochial Western values, like women's rights, on a culture that doesn't want them. These are the people who saw fit to lecture me on my feminist failings.

I'm depressed that there's an _exceedingly_ good chance that both of my kids will get covid, as they've returned to school and preschool in Austin, TX, where the Delta variant is raging out of control, new reports of cases among the kids' schoolmates come almost every day, Daniel has been quarantined at home for the past week because of one such case, there's no vaccination mandate (and a looming battle over mask mandates), and--crucially, tragically, incredibly--**the FDA has not only slow-walked approval of covid vaccines for children under 12, but has pushed back the approval _even further_ than it previously planned, ignoring [unprecedented public objections](https://www.fox43.com/article/news/local/fda-covid-19-vaccine-children-under-12-pfizer-aap-moderna/521-cb2d3d7e-c08e-4920-a0e8-92b81a4d6e90) from the American Academy of Pediatrics.** The FDA blankfaces have done this in spite of the reality, obvious to anyone with eyes and a brain, that they're thereby consigning thousands of children to their deaths, that whatever ultra-rare risks the vaccine poses to children are infinitesimal compared to the overwhelming benefit.

Since I worry that I wasn't clear enough, how about this: in a just world, the FDA in its current form would be dismantled, and ~~all those who needlessly delayed the delivery of covid vaccines to children would be tried for manslaughter~~ [while I still think the case for authorizing covid vaccines for kids right now is _overwhelmingly_ clear, I hereby retract this particular remark, which was based on a factor 5-10 overestimate of the covid mortality risk for kids--for more, see [this comment](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=5769#comment-1907100)]. The blankfaces have _already_ killed more people through pointlessly delaying the approval of covid vaccines than their agency could plausibly have saved through its entire history: do they need to take the children as well? As far as I'm concerned, those who defend the status quo--those who meet the on-the-ground reality of overflowing pediatric hospitals with obfuscatory words about procedures and best practices and the need for yet more data--are no better either morally or intellectually than the anti-vaxx conspiracy theorists, their rightly-reviled cousins.

As icing on the cake, I'm depressed that the College Board is no longer administering the SAT to children under 13, apparently because of federal regulations---which means that Johns Hopkins CTY's famed [Study of Exceptional Talent](https://cty.jhu.edu/testing/study-exceptional-talent-set), a program that made a big difference in my life three decades ago, has been suspended indefinitely. Imagine being a nerdy 11-year-old in 2021: no more tracking, no more gifted programs, no more magnet schools, no more acceleration, no _getting vaccinated against deadly disease_ (!!), … oh, and if perchance you felt the urge to take the SAT, just to prove that you could outscore the grownups who decided to impose all this on you, then no, you're no longer allowed to do that either.

The one bright spot in the endlessly bleak picture is that Daniel, my 4-year-old son, now plays a pretty mean chess game, if not quite at the level of [Beth Harmon](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=5171). Having just learned the rules a few months ago, Daniel now gives me and Dana (admittedly, no one would mistake either of us for Magnus Carlsen) extremely competitive matches; just yesterday he beat several adults in a park. Daniel has come to spend much of his free time (and now that he's quarantined, he has a lot) playing chess against his iPad and watching chess videos. To be clear, he has very little emotional maturity _even for a 4-year-old_ , and unlike me at the same age, he has no overwhelming passion for numbers or counting, but with chess I've finally found a winner. Now I just need to hope that they don't ban chess-playing for children under 13.

So that's it, it's off my chest. Commenters: what else have you got that might cheer me up?
