---
title: "QC ethics and hype: the call is coming from inside the house"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Sun, 21 Mar 2021"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=5387"
---

For years, I'd sometimes hear discussions about the _ethics_ of quantum computing research. Quantum ethics!

When the debates weren't purely semantic, over the [propriety](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=4450) of terms like "quantum supremacy" or "ancilla qubit," they were always about chin-strokers like "but what if cracking RSA encryption gives governments more power to surveil their citizens? or what if only a few big countries or companies get quantum computers, thereby widening the divide between haves and have-nots?" Which, OK, conceivably these will someday be issues. But, besides barely depending on any specific facts about quantum computing, these debates always struck me as oddly _safe_ , because the moral dilemmas were so hypothetical and far removed from us in time.

I confess I may have even occasionally poked fun when asked to expound on quantum ethics. I may have commented that quantum computers probably won't kill anyone unless a dilution refrigerator tips over onto their head. I may have asked forgiveness for feeding custom-designed oracles to [BQP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BQP) and [QMA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QMA), without first consulting an ethics committee about the long-term effects on those complexity classes.

Now fate has punished me for my flippancy. These days, I really _do_ feel like quantum computing research has become an ethical minefield--but not for any of the reasons mentioned previously. What's new is that millions of dollars are now potentially available to quantum computing researchers, along with equity, stock options, and whatever else causes "ka-ching" sound effects and bulging eyes with dollar signs. And in many cases, to have a shot at such riches, all an expert needs to do is profess optimism that quantum computing will have revolutionary, world-changing applications and have them _soon_. Or at least, not object too strongly when others say that.

Some of today's rhetoric will of course remind people of the D-Wave saga, which first brought this blog to prominence when it began in earnest in 2007. Quantum computers, we hear now as then, will soon leave the Earth's fastest supercomputers in the dust. They're going to harness superposition to try all the exponentially many possible solutions at once. They'll crack the Traveling Salesman Problem, and will transform machine learning and AI beyond recognition. Meanwhile, simulations of quantum systems will be key to solving global warming and cancer.

Despite the parallels, though, this new gold rush _doesn 't_ feel to me like the D-Wave one, which seems in retrospect like just a little dry run. If I had to articulate what's new in one sentence, it's that this time "the call is coming from inside the house." Many of the companies making wildly overhyped claims are recognized leaders of the field. They have brilliant quantum computing theorists and experimentalists on their staff with impeccable research records. Some of those researchers are among my best friends. And even when I wince at the claims of near-term applications, in many cases (especially with quantum simulation) the claims aren't _obviously_ false--we won't know for certain until we try it and see! It's genuinely gotten harder to draw the line between defensible optimism and exaggerations verging on fraud.

Indeed, this time around virtually _everyone_ in QC is "complicit" to a greater or lesser degree. I, too, have accepted compensation to consult on quantum computing topics, to give talks at hedge funds, and in a few cases to serve as a scientific adviser to quantum computing startups. I tell myself that, by 2021 standards, this stuff is all trivial chump change--a few thousands of dollars here or there, to expound on the same themes that I already discuss free of charge on this blog. I actually get paid to _dispel_ hype, rather than propagate it! I tell myself that I've turned my back on the orders of magnitude more money available to those willing to hitch their scientific reputations to the aspirations of this or that specific QC company. (Yes, this blog, and my desire to preserve its intellectual independence and credibility, might well be costing me millions!)

But, OK, some would argue that accepting _any_ money from QC companies or QC investors just puts you at the top of a slope with unabashed snake-oil salesmen at the bottom. With the commercialization of our field that started around 2015, there's no bright line anymore marking the boundary between pure scientific curiosity and the pursuit of filthy lucre; it's all just points along a continuum. I'm not sure that these people are wrong.

As some of you might've seen already, IonQ, the trapped-ion QC startup that originated from the University of Maryland, is poised to have the [first-ever quantum computing IPO](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-ionq-m-a-dmy-technology/quantum-computing-provider-ionq-to-go-public-via-2-billion-spac-deal-idUSKBN2B013Z)--a so-called "SPAC IPO," which while I'm a financial ignoramus, apparently involves merging with a shell company and thereby bypassing the SEC's normal IPO rules. Supposedly they're seeking $650 million in new funding and a $2 billion market cap. If you want to see what IonQ is saying about QC to prospective investors, [click here](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5e33152a051d2e7588f7571c/t/60459578b8c075444a656357/1615173012167/IonQ+Investor+Presentation+030721+vFF.pdf). Lacking any choice in the matter, I'll probably say more about these developments in a future post.

Meanwhile, [PsiQuantum](https://psiquantum.com/), the Palo-Alto-based optical QC startup, has [said](https://www.ft.com/content/a5af3039-abbf-4b25-92e2-c40e5957c8cd) that it's soon going to leave "stealth mode." And Amazon, Microsoft, Google, IBM, Honeywell, and other big players continue making large investments in QC--treating it, at least rhetorically, not at all like blue-sky basic research, but like a central part of their future business plans.

All of these companies have produced or funded excellent QC research. And of course, they're all heterogeneous, composed of individuals who might vehemently disagree with each other about the near- or long-term prospects of QC. And yet all of them have, at various times, inspired reflections in me like the ones in this post.

I regret that this post has no clear conclusion. I'm still hashing things out, solicing thoughts from my readers and friends. Speaking of which: this coming Monday, March 22, at 8-10pm US Eastern time, I've decided to hold a discussion around these issues on [Clubhouse](https://www.joinclubhouse.com/)--my "grand debut" on that app, and an opportunity to see whether I like it or not! My friend Adam Brown will moderate the discussion; other likely participants will be John Horgan, George Musser, Michael Nielsen, and Matjaž Leonardis. If you're on Clubhouse, I hope to see you there!

**Update (March 22):** Read [this comment](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=5387#comment-1883356) by "FB" if you'd like to understand how we got to this point.
