---
title: "Quantum computing for policymakers and philosopher-novelists"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Wed, 06 Jun 2018"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=3848"
---

Last week [Rebecca Newberger Goldstein](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rebecca_Goldstein), the great philosopher and novelist who I'm privileged to call a friend, wrote to ask me whether I "see any particular political and security problems that are raised by quantum computing," to help her prepare for a conference she'd be attending in which that question would be discussed.  So I sent her the response below, and then decided that it might be of broader interest.

_Shtetl-Optimized_ regulars and QC aficionados will find absolutely nothing new here--move right along, you've been warned.  But I decided to post my (slightly edited) response to Rebecca anyway, for two reasons.  First, so I have something to send anyone who asks me the same question in the future--something that, moreover, as Feynman said about the _Feynman Lectures on Physics_ , contains views "not far from my own."  And second, because, while of course I've written [many](https://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/06/science/scott-aaronson-quantum-computing-promises-new-insights.html) [other](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=208) [popular-level](http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~robins/The_Limits_of_Quantum_Computers.pdf) [quantum](https://www.scottaaronson.com/writings/highschool.html) [computing](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=1628) [essays](https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/cross-check/scott-aaronson-answers-every-ridiculously-big-question-i-throw-at-him/), with basically all of them, my goal was to get the reader to hear the music, so to speak.  On reflection, though, I think there might also be some value in a piece for business and policy people (not to mention humanist intellectuals) that sets aside the harmony of the interfering amplitudes, and just tries to convey some of the words to the song without egregious howlers--which is what Rebecca's question about "political and security problems" forced me to do.  This being quantum computing, of course, much of what one finds in the press doesn't _even_ get the lyrics right!  So without further ado:

* * *

Dear Rebecca,

If you want something serious and thoughtful about your question, you probably won’t do much better than the recent essay ["The Potential Impact of Quantum Computers on Society,"](https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.05380) by my longtime friend and colleague Ronald de Wolf.

To elaborate my own thoughts, though: I feel like the political and security problems raised by quantum computing are mostly the usual ones raised by any new technology (national prestige competitions, haves vs have-nots, etc)—but with one added twist, coming from quantum computers’ famous ability to break our current methods for public-key cryptography.

As Ronald writes, you should think of a quantum computer as a specialized device, which is unlikely to improve all or even most of what we do with today’s computers, but which could give dramatic speedups for a few specific problems.  There are three most important types of applications that we know about today:

**(1) Simulation of quantum physics and chemistry.** This was Richard Feynman’s original application when he proposed quantum computing in 1981, and I think it’s still the most important one economically.  Having a fast, general-purpose quantum simulator could help a lot in designing new drugs, materials, solar cells, high-temperature superconductors, chemical reactions for [making fertilizer](https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.03590), etc.  Obviously, these are not applications like web browsing or email that will directly affect the everyday computer user.  But they’re areas where you’d only need a few high-profile successes to generate billions of dollars of value.

**(2) Breaking existing[public-key cryptography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public-key_cryptography).**  This is the most direct political and security implication.  Every time you visit a website that begins with “https,” the authentication and encryption--including, e.g., protecting your credit card number--happen using a cryptosystem based on factoring integers or discrete logarithms or a few other related problems in number theory.  A full, universal quantum computer, if built, is known to be able to break all of this.

Having said that, we all know today that hackers, and intelligence agencies, can compromise people's data in hundreds of more prosaic ways than by building a quantum computer!  Usually they don't even bother trying to break the encryption, relying instead on poor implementations and human error.

And it's also important to understand that a quantum computer wouldn't mean the end of online security.  There are public-key cryptosystems currently under development--most notably, those [based on lattices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lattice-based_cryptography)--that are believed to resist attack even by quantum computers; NIST is [planning to establish standards](https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-cryptography/post-quantum-cryptography-standardization) for these systems over the next few years.  Switching to these ["post-quantum" systems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Post-quantum_cryptography) would be a significant burden, much like fixing the Y2K bug (and they're also somewhat slower than our current systems), but hopefully it would only need to happen once.

As you might imagine, there's some interest in switching to post-quantum cryptosystems even now--for example, if you wanted to encrypt messages today with some confidence they won't be decrypted even 30 years from now.  Google did a [trial](https://security.googleblog.com/2016/07/experimenting-with-post-quantum.html) of a post-quantum cryptosystem two years ago.  On the other hand, given that ~~a large fraction of web servers[still use](https://weakdh.org/imperfect-forward-secrecy-ccs15.pdf) 512-bit "export grade" cryptography that was already breakable in the 1990s~~ (**good news:** _commenter Viktor Dukhovni tells me that this has now been mostly fixed, since security experts, including my childhood friend Alex Halderman, raised a stink about it a few years ago_), it's a safe bet that getting everyone to upgrade would take quite a long time, even if the experts agreed (which they don't yet) _which_ of the various post-quantum cryptosystems should become the new standard.  And since, as I said, most attacks target mistakes in implementation rather than the underlying cryptography, we should expect any switch to post-quantum cryptography to make security _worse_ rather than better in the short run.

As a radical alternative to post-quantum crypto, there's also (ironically enough) [quantum cryptography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_key_distribution), which doesn't work over the existing Internet--it requires setting up new communications infrastructure--but which has already been deployed in a tiny number of places, and which promises security based only on quantum physics (and, of course, on the proper construction of the hardware), as opposed to mathematical problems that a quantum computer or any other kind of computer could potentially solve.  According to a long-running joke (or not-quite-joke) in our field, one of the central applications of quantum computing will be to create demand for quantum cryptography!

Finally, there's _private-key_ cryptography--i.e., the traditional kind, where the sender and recipient meet in secret to agree on a key in advance--which is hardly threatened by quantum computing at all: you can achieve the same level of security as before, we think, by simply doubling the key lengths.  If there's _no_ constraint on key length, then the ultimate here is the [one-time pad](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One-time_pad), which when used correctly, is theoretically unbreakable by _anything_ short of actual physical access to the sender or recipient (e.g., hacking their computers, or beating down their doors with an ax).  But while private-key crypto might be fine for spy agencies, it's impractical for widespread deployment on the Internet, unless we _also_ have a secure way to distribute the keys.  This is precisely where public-key crypto typically gets used today, and where quantum crypto could in principle be used in the future: to exchange private keys that are then used to encrypt and decrypt the actual data.

I should also mention that, because it breaks elliptic-curve-based signature schemes, a quantum computer [might](https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.10377) let a thief steal billions of dollars' worth of Bitcoin.  Again, this could in principle be fixed by migrating Bitcoin (and other cryptocurrencies) to quantum-resistant cryptographic problems, but that hasn't been done yet.

**(3) Optimization and machine learning.**   These are obviously huge application areas for industry, defense, and pretty much anything else.  The main issue is just that we [don’t](https://www.scottaaronson.com/papers/qml.pdf) [know](https://www.csm.ornl.gov/workshops/ascrqcs2015/documents/jordan.pdf) how to get as large a speedup from a quantum computer as we’d like for these applications.  A quantum computer, we think, will often be able to solve optimization and machine learning problems in something like the _square root_ of the number of steps that would be needed classically, using variants of what's called [Grover's algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grover%27s_algorithm).  So, that’s significant, but it’s not the _exponential_ speedup and complete game-changer that we’d have for quantum simulation or for breaking public-key cryptography.  Most likely, a quantum computer will be able to achieve exponential speedups for these sorts of problems only in special cases, and no one knows yet how important those special cases will be in practice.  This is a still-developing research area--there might be further theoretical breakthroughs (in inventing new quantum algorithms, analyzing old algorithms, matching the performance of the quantum algorithms by classical algorithms, etc.), but it's also possible that we won't _really_  understand the potential of quantum computers for these sorts of problems until we have the actual devices and can test them out.

 

As for how far away all this is: given the spectacular progress by Google and others over the last few years, my guess is that we’re at most a decade away from some small, special-purpose quantum computers (with ~50-200 qubits) that could be useful for quantum simulation.  These are what the physicist John Preskill called "Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum" (NISQ) computers in his [excellent recent essay.](https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.00862)

However, my guess is also that it will take longer than that to get the full, error-corrected, universal quantum computers that would be needed for optimization and (most relevant to your question) for breaking public-key cryptography.  Currently, the engineering requirements for a "full, universal" quantum computer look downright scary--so we're waiting either for further breakthroughs that would cut the costs by a few more orders of magnitude (which, by their very nature, can't be predicted), or for some modern-day General Groves and Oppenheimer who'd be licensed to spend however many hundreds of billions of dollars it would take to make it happen sooner.

The race to build "NISQ" devices has been heating up, with a shift from pure academic research to venture capitalists and industrial efforts just within the last 4-5 years, noticeably changing the character of our field.

In this particular race, I think that the US is the clear world leader right now--specifically, Google, IBM, Intel, Microsoft, University of Maryland / NIST, and various startups--followed by Europe (with serious experimental efforts in the Netherlands, Austria, and the UK among other places).  Here I should mention that the EU has a new [1-billion-Euro initiative](https://www.nature.com/news/europe-s-billion-euro-quantum-project-takes-shape-1.21925?WT.ec_id=NATURE-20170504&spMailingID=53985288&spUserID=MjA1NTkwMDk2NQS2&spJobID=1160505967&spReportId=MTE2MDUwNTk2NwS2) in quantum information.  Other countries that have made or are now making significant investments include Canada, Australia, China, and Israel.  Surprisingly, there’s been very little investment in Russia in this area, and less than I would've expected in Japan.

China is a very interesting case.  They’ve chosen to focus less on quantum computing than on the related areas of quantum communication and cryptography, where they’ve become the world leader.  Last summer, in a big upset, China launched the [first satellite](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_Experiments_at_Space_Scale) ("Micius") specifically for quantum communications, and were able to use it to do quantum cryptography and to distribute entanglement over thousands of miles (from one end of China to the other), the previous record being maybe 100 miles.  If the US has anything comparable to this, it isn’t publicly known (my guess is that we don’t).

This past year, there were [hearings in Congress](https://science.house.gov/legislation/hearings/american-leadership-quantum-technology) about the need for the US to invest more in quantum information, for example to keep up with China, and it looks likely to happen.  As indifferent or hostile as the current administration has been toward science more generally, the government and defense people I've met are very much on board with quantum information--often more so than I am!  I've even heard China's Micius satellite referred to as the "quantum Sputnik," the thing that will spur the US and others to spend much more to keep up.

As you'd imagine, part of me is delighted that something so abstruse, and interesting for fundamental science, and close to my heart, is now getting attention and funding at this level.  But part of me is worried by how much of the current boom I _know_ to be fueled by misconceptions, among policymakers and journalists and the general public, about what quantum computers will be able to do for us once we have them.  Basically, people think they'll be magic oracles that will solve all problems faster, rather than just special classes of problems like the ones I enumerated above--and that they'll simply allow the continuation of the Moore's Law that we know and love, rather than being something fundamentally different.  I've been [trying](https://scottaaronson.blog/?cat=17) to correct these misconceptions, on my blog and elsewhere, to anyone who will listen, for all the good that's done!  In any case, the history of AI reminds us that a [crash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AI_winter) could easily follow the current boom-time, if the results of quantum computing research don't live up to people's expectations.

I guess there's one final thing I'll say.  Quantum computers are sometimes analogized to nuclear weapons, as a disruptive technology with implications for global security that scientists theorized about decades before it became technically feasible.  But there are some fundamental differences.  Most obviously: the deterrent value of a nuclear weapon comes if everyone knows you have it but you never need to use it, whereas the intelligence value of a quantum computer comes if you use it but no one knows you have it.

(Which is related to how the Manhattan Project entered the world's consciousness in August 1945, whereas Bletchley Park--which was much more important to the actual winning of WWII--remained secret until the 1970s.)

As I said before, once your adversaries realized that you had a universal quantum computer, or might have one soon, they could switch to quantum-resistant forms of encryption, at least for their most sensitive secrets--in which case, as far as encryption was concerned, everyone would be more-or-less back where they started.  Such a switch would be onerous, cost billions of dollars, and (in practice) probably open up its own security holes unrelated to quantum computing.  But we think we already basically understand how to do it.

This is one reason why, even in a hypothetical future where hostile powers got access to quantum computers (and despite the past two years, I _still_ don't think of the US as a "hostile power"--I mean, like, North Korea or ISIS or something…!)--even in that future, I'd still be much less concerned about the hostile powers having this brand-new technology, than I'd be about their having the generations-old technology of fission and fusion bombs.

Best,  
Scott

* * *

**Unrelated Update (June 8):** Ian Tierney asked me to advertise a [Kickstarter](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1214133352/richard-feynman-i-love-my-wife-short-film) for a short film that he's planning to make about Richard Feynman, and a letter that he wrote to his first wife Arlene after she died.
