---
title: "Scott Aaronson Speculation Grant WINNERS!"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Fri, 04 Feb 2022"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=6256"
---

Two weeks ago, I [announced](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=6232) on this blog that, thanks to the remarkable generosity of Jaan Tallinn, and the Speculation Grants program of the [Survival and Flourishing Fund](https://survivalandflourishing.fund/) that Jaan founded, I had $200,000 to give away to charitable organizations of my choice. So, inspired by what Scott Alexander had [done](https://astralcodexten.substack.com/p/acx-grants-results), I invited the readers of _Shtetl-Optimized_ to pitch their charities, mentioning only some general areas of interest to me (e.g., advanced math education at the precollege level, climate change mitigation, pandemic preparedness, endangered species conservation, and any good causes that would enrage the people who attack me on Twitter).

I'm grateful to have gotten more than twenty well-thought-out pitches; you can read a subset of them in the [comment thread](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=6232#comments). Now, having studied them all, I've decided--as I hadn't at the start--to use my entire allotment to make as strong a statement as I can about a single cause: namely, **subject-matter passion and excellence in precollege STEM education**.

I'll be directing funds to some shockingly cash-starved math camps, math circles, coding outreach programs, magnet schools, and enrichment programs, in Maine and Oregon and England and Ghana and Ethiopia and Jamaica. The programs I've chosen target a variety of ability levels, not merely the "mathematical elite." Several explicitly focus on minority and other underserved populations. But they share a goal of raising every student they work with as high as possible, rather than pushing the students down to fit some standardized curriculum.

Language like that ought to be meaningless boilerplate, but alas, it no longer is. We live in a time when the state of California, in a misguided pursuit of "modernization" and "equity," is [poised](https://sites.google.com/view/k12mathmatters/home) to eliminate 8th-grade algebra, make it nearly impossible for high-school seniors to take AP Calculus, and shunt as many students as possible from serious mathematical engagement into a "data science pathway" that in practice might teach little more than how to fill in spreadsheets. (This watering-down effort now _itself_ looks liable to be watered down--but only because of a furious pushback from parents and STEM professionals, pushback in which I'm proud that this blog [played a small role](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=6146).) We live in a time when elite universities are racing to eliminate the SAT--thus, for all their highminded rhetoric, effectively slamming the door on thousands of nerdy kids from poor or immigrant backgrounds who know how to think, but not how to shine in a college admissions popularity pageant. We live in a time when America's legendary STEM magnet high schools, from Thomas Jefferson in Virginia to Bronx Science to Lowell in San Francisco, rather than being celebrated as the national treasures that they are, or better yet replicated, are bitterly attacked as "elitist" (even while competitive sports and music programs are not similarly attacked)--and are now being forcibly "demagnetized" by bureaucrats, made all but indistinguishable from other high schools, over the desperate pleas of their students, parents, and alumni.

And--alright, fine, on a global scale, arresting climate change is surely a higher-priority issue than protecting the intellectual horizons of a few teenage STEM nerds. The survival of liberal democracy is a higher-priority issue. Pandemic preparedness, poverty, malnutrition are higher-priority issues. Some of my friends strongly believe that _the danger of AI becoming super-powerful and taking over the world_ is the highest-priority issue … and truthfully, with this week's announcements of [AlphaCode](https://deepmind.com/blog/article/Competitive-programming-with-AlphaCode) and [OpenAI's theorem prover](https://openai.com/blog/formal-math/), which achieve human-competitive performance in elite programming and math competitions respectively, I can't confidently declare that they're wrong.

On the other hand, when you think about the astronomical returns on every penny that was invested in setting a teenage Ramanujan or Einstein or Turing or Sofya Kovalevskaya or Norman Borlaug or Mario Molina onto their trajectories in life … and the comically tiny budgets of the world-leading programs that aim to nurture the _next_ Ramanujans, to the point where $10,000 often seems like a windfall to those programs … well, you might come to the conclusion that the "protecting nerds" thing actually isn't _that_ far down the global priority list! Like, it probably cracks the top ten.

And there's more to it than that. There's a reason beyond parochialism, it dawned on me, why individual charities tend to specialize in wildlife conservation in Ecuador or deworming in Swaziland or some other little domain, rather than simply casting around for the highest-priority cause on earth. _Expertise matters_ --since one wants to make, not only good judgments about which stuff to support, but good judgments that most others can't or haven't made. In my case, it would seem sensible to leverage the fact that I'm Scott Aaronson. I've spent much of my career in math/CS education and outreach--mostly, of course, at the university level, but _by god_ did I personally experience the good and the bad in nearly every form of precollege STEM education! I'm pretty confident in my ability to distinguish the two, and for whatever I don't know, I have close friends in the area who I trust.

There's also a practical issue: in order for me to fund something, the recipient has to fill out a somewhat time-consuming application to SFF. If I'd added, say, another $20,000 drop into the bucket of global health or sustainability or whatever, there's no guarantee that the intended recipients of my largesse would even notice, or care enough to go through the application process if they did. With STEM education, by contrast, holy crap! I've got an inbox full of _Shtetl-Optimized_ readers explaining how their little math program is an intellectual oasis that's changed the lives of hundreds of middle-schoolers in their region, and how $20,000 would mean the difference between their program continuing or not. _That 's_ someone who I trust to fill out the form.

Without further ado, then, here are the first-ever Scott Aaronson Speculation Grants:

  * $57,000 for [Canada/USA Mathcamp](https://www.mathcamp.org/), which changed my life when I attended it as a 15-year-old in 1996, and which I returned to as a lecturer in 2008. The funds will be used for COVID testing to allow Mathcamp to resume in-person this summer, and perhaps scholarships and off-season events as well.
  * $30,000 for [AddisCoder](https://www.addiscoder.com/), which has had spectacular success teaching computer science to high-school students in Ethiopia, placing some of its alumni at elite universities in the US, to help them expand to a new "JamCoders" program in Jamaica. These programs were founded by UC Berkeley's amazing [Jelani Nelson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jelani_Nelson), also with involvement from friend and _Shtetl-Optimized_ semi-regular [Boaz Barak](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boaz_Barak).
  * $30,000 for the [Maine School of Science and Mathematics](https://www.mssm.org/), which seems to offer a curriculum comparable to those of Thomas Jefferson, Bronx Science, or the nation's other elite magnet high schools, but (1) on a shoestring budget and (2) in rural Maine. I hadn't even heard of MSSM before Alex Altair, an alum and _Shtetl-Optimized_ reader, told me about it, but now I couldn't be prouder to support it.
  * $30,000 for the [Eugene Math Circle](https://pages.uoregon.edu/nemirovm/emc.html), which provides a math enrichment lifeline to kids in Oregon, and whose funding was just cut. This donation will keep the program alive for another year.
  * $13,000 for the [Summer Science Program](https://summerscience.org/), which this summer will offer research experiences to high-school juniors in astrophysics, biochemistry, and genomics.
  * $10,000 for the [MISE Foundation](https://misemaths.wordpress.com/), which provides math enrichment for the top middle- and high-school students in Ghana.
  * $10,000 for [Number Champions](https://www.numberchampions.org.uk/), which provides one-on-one coaching to kids in the UK who struggle with math.
  * $10,000 for [Bridge to Enter Advanced Mathematics (BEAM)](https://www.beammath.org/), which runs math summer programs in New York, Los Angeles, and elsewhere for underserved populations.
  * $10,000 for [Powderhouse](https://powderhouse.org/), an innovative lab school being founded in Somerville, MA.



While working on this, it crossed my mind that, on my deathbed, I might be at least as happy about having directed funds to efforts like these as about any of my research or teaching.

To the applicants who weren't chosen: I'm sorry, as many of you had wonderful projects too! As I said in the earlier post, you remain warmly invited to apply to SFF, and to make your pitch to the other Speculators and/or the main SFF committee.

Needless to say, anyone who feels inspired should add to my (or rather, SFF's) modest contributions to these STEM programs. My sense is that, while $200k can go eye-poppingly far in this area, it still hasn't come _close_ to exhausting even the lowest-hanging fruit.

Also needless to say, the opinions in this post are my own and are not necessarily shared by SFF or by the organizations I’m supporting. The latter are welcome to disagree with me as long as they keep up their great work!

Huge thanks again to Jaan, to SFF, to my SFF contact Andrew Critch, to everyone (whether chosen or not) who participated in this contest, and to everyone who's putting in work to broaden kids' intellectual horizons or otherwise make the world a little less horrible.
