---
title: "The Physics Nobel, Gaussian BosonSampling, and Dorian Abbot"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Tue, 05 Oct 2021"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=5859"
---

1\. Huge congratulations to the [winners](https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2021/summary/) of this year's Nobel Prize in Physics: [Syukuro Manabe](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syukuro_Manabe) and [Klaus Hasselmann](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klaus_Hasselmann) for climate modelling, and separately, [Giorgio Parisi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giorgio_Parisi) for statistical physics. While I don't know the others, I had the great honor to get to know Parisi three years ago, when he was chair of the committee that awarded me the [Tomassoni-Chisesi Prize in Physics](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=3955), and when I visited Parisi's department at Sapienza University of Rome to give the prize lecture and collect the award. I remember Parisi's kindness, a lot of good food, and a lot of discussion of the interplay between theoretical computer science and physics. Note that, while much of Parisi's work is beyond my competence to comment on, in computer science he's very well-known for applying statistical physics methods to the analysis of [survey propagation](https://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0212002)--an algorithm that revolutionized the study of random 3SAT when it was introduced two decades ago.

* * *

2\. Two weeks ago, a group at Google [put out a paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.11525) with a new efficient classical algorithm to simulate the recent Gaussian BosonSampling experiments from USTC in China. They argued that this algorithm called into question USTC's claim of BosonSampling-based quantum supremacy. Since then, I've been in contact with Sergio Boixo from Google, Chaoyang Lu from USTC, and Jelmer Renema, a Dutch BosonSampling expert and friend of the blog, to try to get to the bottom of this. Very briefly, the situation seems to be that Google's new algorithm outperforms the USTC experiment on one particular metric: namely, _total variation distance from the ideal marginal distribution, if (crucially) you look at only a subset of the optical modes_ , _say 14 modes out of 144 total_. Meanwhile, though, if you look at the kth-order correlations for large values of k, then the USTC experiment continues to win. With the experiment, the correlations fall off exponentially with k but still have a meaningful, detectable signal even for (say) k=19, whereas with Google's spoofing algorithm, you choose the k that you want to spoof (say, 2 or 3), and then the correlations become nonsense for larger k.

Now, given that you were only ever _supposed_ to see a quantum advantage from BosonSampling if you looked at the kth-order correlations for large values of k, and given that we already knew, from the work of Leonid Gurvits, that _very_ small marginals in BosonSampling experiments would be easy to reproduce on a classical computer, my inclination is to say that USTC's claim of BosonSampling-based quantum supremacy still stands. On the other hand, it's true that, with BosonSampling especially, more so than with qubit-based random circuit sampling, we currently lack an adequate theoretical understanding of what the _target_ should be. That is, which numerical metric should an experiment aim to maximize, and how well does it have to score on that metric before it's plausibly outperforming any fast classical algorithm? One thing I feel confident about is that, whichever metric is chosen--Linear Cross-Entropy or whatever else--it needs to capture the kth-order correlations for large values of k. No metric that's insensitive to those correlations is good enough.

* * *

3\. Like many others, I was outraged and depressed that MIT [uninvited Dorian Abbot](https://bariweiss.substack.com/p/mit-abandons-its-mission-and-me) (see also [here](https://www.newsweek.com/mit-cancels-geophysicists-lecture-after-activists-outrage-over-his-views-diversity-1635371)), a geophysicist at the University of Chicago, who was slated to give the Carlson Lecture in the Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences about the atmospheres of extrasolar planets. The reason for the cancellation was that, totally unrelatedly to his scheduled lecture, Abbot had [argued in _Newsweek_](https://www.newsweek.com/diversity-problem-campus-opinion-1618419) and elsewhere that Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion initiatives should aim for equality for opportunity rather than equality of outcomes, a Twitter-mob decided to go after him in retaliation, and they succeeded. It should go without saying that it's perfectly reasonable to **disagree** with Abbot's stance, to **counterargue** --if those very concepts haven't gone the way of floppy disks. It should also go without saying that the MIT EAPS department chair is _free_ to bow to social-media pressure, as he did, rather than standing on principle … just like I'm _free_ to criticize him for it. To my mind, though, cancelling a scientific talk because of the speaker's centrist (!) political views completely, 100% validates the right's narrative about academia, that it's become a fanatically intolerant echo chamber. To my fellow progressive academics, I beseech thee in the bowels of Bertrand Russell: _why would you commit such an unforced error?_

Yes, one can _imagine_ views (e.g., open Nazism) so hateful that they might justify the cancellation of unrelated scientific lectures by people who hold those views, as many physicists after WWII refused to speak to Werner Heisenberg. But it seems obvious to me--as it would've been obvious to everyone else not long ago--that no matter where a reasonable person draws the line, Abbot's views as he expressed them in _Newsweek_ don't come within a hundred miles of it. To be more explicit still: if Abbot's views justify deplatforming him as a planetary scientist, then **all my quantum computing and theoretical computer science lectures deserve to be cancelled too** , for the many attempts I've made on this blog over the past 16 years to share my honest thoughts and life experiences, to write like a vulnerable human being rather than like a university press office. While I'm sure some sneerers gleefully embrace that implication, I ask everyone else to consider how deeply they believe in the idea of academic freedom at all--keeping in mind that such a commitment _only ever gets tested_ when there's a chance someone might denounce you for it.

**Update:** Princeton's James Madison Program has [volunteered](https://jmp.princeton.edu/events/climate-and-potential-life-other-planets) to host Abbot's Zoom talk in place of MIT. The talk is entitled "Climate and the Potential for Life on Other Planets." Like probably hundreds of others who heard about this only because of the attempted cancellation, I plan to attend!

**Unrelated Bonus Update:** [Here's a neat YouTube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=934eLObPLmM) put together by the ACM about me as well as David Silver of AlphaGo and AlphaZero, on the occasion of our ACM Prizes in Computing.
