---
title: "The Zen Anti-Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Thu, 04 Mar 2021"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=5359"
---

As I lay bedridden this week, knocked out by my second dose of the Moderna vaccine, I decided I should blog some more half-baked ideas because what the hell? It feels therapeutic, I have tenure, and anyone who doesn't like it can close their broswer tab.

So: although I've written tens of thousands [of](https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/article/can-quantum-computing-reveal-the-true-meaning-of-quantum-mechanics/) [words](https://arxiv.org/abs/1306.0159), [on](https://www.scottaaronson.com/papers/philos.pdf) [this](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=1103) [blog](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=3628) [and](https://www.scottaaronson.com/democritus/) [elsewhere](https://www.scottaaronson.com/qclec.pdf), about interpretations of quantum mechanics, again and again I've dodged the question of which interpretation (if any) I _really believe myself_. Today, at last, I'll emerge from the shadows and tell you precisely where I stand.

I hold that all interpretations of QM are just crutches that are better or worse at helping you along to the Zen realization that **QM is what it is and doesn’t need an interpretation**.  As Sidney Coleman [famously argued](https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.12671), what needs reinterpretation is not QM itself, but all our _pre_ -quantum philosophical baggage--the baggage that leads us to demand, for example, that a wavefunction |ψ⟩ either be "real" like a stubbed toe or else "unreal" like a dream. Crucially, because this philosophical baggage differs somewhat from person to person, the "best" interpretation--meaning, the one that leads most quickly to the desired Zen state--can also differ from person to person. Meanwhile, though, thousands of physicists (and chemists, mathematicians, quantum computer scientists, etc.) have approached the Zen state merely by spending decades working with QM, never worrying much about interpretations at all. This is probably the truest path; it's just that most people lack the inclination, ability, or time.

Greg Kuperberg, one of the smartest people I know, once told me that the problem with the Many-Worlds Interpretation is not that it says anything wrong, but only that it's "melodramatic" and "overwritten." Greg is far along the Zen path, probably further than me.

You shouldn't confuse the Zen Anti-Interpretation with "Shut Up And Calculate." The latter phrase, mistakenly attributed to Feynman but really due to David Mermin, is something one might say at the _beginning_ of the path, when one is as a baby. I'm talking here only about the _endpoint_ of the path, which one can approach but never reach--the endpoint where you intuitively understand exactly what a Many-Worlder, Copenhagenist, or Bohmian would say about any given issue, and also how they'd respond to each other, and how they'd respond to the responses, etc. but after years of study and effort you've _returned_ to the situation of the baby, who just sees the thing for what it is.

I don’t mean to say that the interpretations are all interchangeable, or equally good or bad. If you had to, you could call even me a “Many-Worlder,” but _only_ in the following limited sense: that in fifteen years of teaching quantum information, my experience has consistently been that for _most_ students, [Everett's crutch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Many-worlds_interpretation) is the best one currently on the market. At any rate, it's the one that's the most like a straightforward _picture_ of the equations, and the least like a wobbly tower of words that might collapse if you utter any wrong ones.  Unlike Bohr, Everett will never make you feel stupid for asking the questions an inquisitive child would ask; he'll simply give you answers that are as clear, logical, and internally consistent as they are metaphysically extravagant. That's a start.

The [Copenhagen Interpretation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copenhagen_interpretation) retains a place of honor as the _first_ crutch, for decades the _only_ crutch, and the one closest to the spirit of positivism. Unfortunately, _wielding_ the Copenhagen crutch requires mad philosophical skillz--which parts of the universe should you temporarily regard as "classical"? which questions should be answered, and which deflected?--to the point where, if you're capable of all that verbal footwork, then why do you even _need_ a crutch in the first place? In the hands of amateurs--meaning, alas, nearly everyone--Copenhagen often leads _away_ _from_ rather than toward the Zen state, as one sees with the generations of New-Age bastardizations about "observations creating reality."

As for [deBroglie-Bohm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/De_Broglie%E2%80%93Bohm_theory)--well, that's a weird, interesting, baroque crutch, one whose actual details (the preferred basis and the guiding equation) are historically contingent and tied to specific physical systems. It's probably the right crutch for _someone_ --it gets eternal credit for having led Bell to discover the Bell inequality--but its quirks definitely need to be discarded along the way.

Note that, among those who approach the Zen state, many might still call themselves Many-Worlders or Copenhagenists or Bohmians or whatever--just as those far along in spiritual enlightenment might still call themselves Buddhists or Catholics or Muslims or Jews (or atheists or agnostics)--even though, by that point, they might have more in common with each other than they do with their supposed coreligionists or co-irreligionists.

Alright, but isn't all this Zen stuff just a way to dodge the _actual, substantive_ questions about QM, by cheaply claiming to have transcended them? If that's your charge, then please help yourself to the following FAQ about the details of the Zen Anti-Interpretation.

  1. **What is a quantum state?** It's a unit vector of complex numbers (or if we're talking about mixed states, then a trace-1, Hermitian, positive semidefinite matrix), which encodes everything there is to know about a physical system.  

  2. **OK, but are the quantum states "ontic" (really out in the world), or "epistemic" (only in our heads)?** Dude. Do "basketball games" really exist, or is that just a phrase we use to summarize our knowledge about certain large agglomerations of interacting quarks and leptons? Do even the "quarks" and "leptons" exist, or are those just words for excitations of the more fundamental fields? Does "jealousy" exist? Pretty much _all_ our concepts are complicated grab bags of "ontic" and "epistemic," so it shouldn't surprise us if quantum states are too. Bad dichotomy.  

  3. **Why are there probabilities in QM?** Because QM _is_ a (the?) generalization of probability theory to involve complex numbers, whose squared absolute values are probabilities. It _includes_ probability as a special case.  

  4. **But why do the probabilities obey the Born rule?** Because, once the unitary part of QM has picked out the 2-norm as being special, for the probabilities _also_ to be governed by the 2-norm is pretty much the only possibility that makes mathematical sense; there are many nice theorems formalizing that intuition under reasonable assumptions.  

  5. **What is an "observer"?** It's exactly what modern decoherence theory says it is: a particular kind of quantum system that interacts with other quantum systems, becomes entangled with them, and thereby records information about them--reversibly in principle but irreversibly in practice.  

  6. **Can observers be manipulated in coherent superposition, as in the[Wigner's Friend](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wigner%27s_friend) scenario?** If so, they'd be radically unlike any physical system we've ever had direct experience with. So, are you asking whether such "observers" would be _conscious_ , or if so what they'd be conscious of? Who the hell knows?  

  7. **Do "other" branches of the wavefunction--ones, for example, where my life took a different course--exist in the same sense this one does?** If you start with a quantum state for the early universe and then time-evolve it forward, then yes, you'll get not only "our" branch but also a proliferation of other branches, in the overwhelming majority of which Donald Trump was never president and civilization didn't grind to a halt because of a bat near Wuhan.  But how could we possibly know whether anything "breathes fire" into the other branches and makes them real, when we have no idea what breathes fire into _this_ branch and makes _it_ real? This is not a dodge--it's just that a simple “yes” or “no” would fail to do justice to the enormity of such a question, which is above the pay grade of physics as it currently exists.   

  8. **Is this it? Have you brought me to the end of the path of understanding QM?** No, I've just pointed the way toward the _beginning_ of the path. The most fundamental tenet of the Zen Anti-Interpretation is that there's no shortcut to actually [working](https://www.scottaaronson.com/qclec.pdf) [through](https://www.amazon.com/Quantum-Mechanics-Theoretical-Leonard-Susskind/dp/0465062903/ref=asc_df_0465062903/?tag=hyprod-20&linkCode=df0&hvadid=312014159412&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=7852945785672685485&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9028280&hvtargid=pla-435140302691&psc=1) the Bell inequality, quantum teleportation, Shor's algorithm, the Kochen-Specker and PBR theorems, possibly even a … _photon_ or a _hydrogen atom_ , so you can see quantum probability in action and be enlightened. I'm further along the path than I was twenty years ago, but not as far along as some of my colleagues. Even the greatest quantum Zen masters will be able to get further when new quantum phenomena and protocols are discovered in the future. All the same, though--and this is another major teaching of the Zen Anti-Interpretation--there's more to life than achieving greater and greater clarity about the foundations of QM. And on that note…



To those who asked me about Claus Peter Schnorr's [claim](https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/232) to have discovered a fast _classical_ factoring algorithm, thereby "destroying" (in his words) the RSA cryptosystem, see (e.g.) [this Twitter thread by Keegan Ryan](https://twitter.com/inf_0_/status/1367376526300172288?fbclid=IwAR19Ip7XyoPjHfm9WBzqiUkQpxUVLGfVTgLGQmmncgrkUsvcLIrkzbOPw_U), which explains what certainly _looks_ like a fatal error in Schnorr's paper.
