---
title: "The demise of Scientific American: Guest post by Ashutosh Jogalekar"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Mon, 03 Jan 2022"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=6202"
---

**Scott 's foreword**

One week ago, [E. O. Wilson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E._O._Wilson)--the legendary naturalist and conservationist, and man who was universally acknowledged to know more about ants than anyone else in human history--passed away at age 92. A mere three days later, _Scientific American_ --or more precisely, the zombie clickbait rag that now flaunts that name--published a [shameful hit-piece](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-complicated-legacy-of-e-o-wilson/), smearing Wilson for his "racist ideas" without, incredibly, so much as a single quote from Wilson, or any other attempt to substantiate its libel (see also [this response by Jerry Coyne](https://whyevolutionistrue.com/2021/12/30/scientific-american-does-an-asinine-hit-job-on-e-o-wilson-calling-him-a-racist/)). _SciAm_ 's _Pravda_ -like attack included the following extraordinary sentence, which I thought worthy of [Alan Sokal's _Social Text_ hoax](https://physics.nyu.edu/faculty/sokal/transgress_v2/transgress_v2_singlefile.html):

> The so-called normal distribution of statistics assumes that there are default humans who serve as the standard that the rest of us can be accurately measured against.

There are intellectually honest people who don't know what the [normal distribution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal_distribution) is. There are no intellectually honest people who, not knowing what it is, figure that it must be something racist.

On Twitter, Laura Helmuth, the editor-in-chief now running _SciAm_ into the ground, [described](https://twitter.com/laurahelmuth/status/1476531766118682625) her magazine's calumny against Wilson as "insightful" (the replies, including from Richard Dawkins, are fun to read). I suppose it was as "insightful" as _SciAm_ 's [disgraceful attack](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/eric-lander-is-not-the-ideal-choice-for-presidential-science-adviser/) last year on Eric Lander, President Biden's ultra-competent science advisor and a leader in the war on COVID, for … being a white male, which appears to have been E. O. Wilson's crime as well. (Think I must be misrepresenting the "critique" of Lander? Read it!)

Anyway, in response to _Scientific American_ 's libel of Wilson, I wrote on my Facebook that I'll no longer agree to write for or be interviewed by them (you can read my old stuff free of charge [here](http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~robins/The_Limits_of_Quantum_Computers.pdf) or [here](https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/cross-check/scott-aaronson-answers-every-ridiculously-big-question-i-throw-at-him/)), unless and until there's a complete change of editorial direction. I encourage all other scientists to commit likewise, thereby making it common knowledge that the entity that now calls itself "Scientific American" bears the same relation to the legendary home of Martin Gardner as does a corpse to a living being. Fortunately, there are high-quality online venues (e.g., _[Quanta](https://www.quantamagazine.org/)_) that partly fill the role that _Scientific American_ abdicated.

After reading my Facebook post, my friend [Ashutosh Jogalekar](https://twitter.com/curiouswavefn?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor) was inspired to post an essay of his own. Ashutosh used to write regularly for _Scientific American_ , until he was fired seven years ago over a [column](https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/the-curious-wavefunction/richard-feynman-sexism-and-changing-perceptions-of-a-scientific-icon/) in which he advocated acknowledging Richard Feynman's flaws, including his arrogance and casual sexism, but also understanding those flaws within the context of Feynman's whole life, including the tragic death of his first wife Arlene. (Yes, that was really it! Read the piece!) Below, I'm sharing Ashutosh's moving essay about E. O. Wilson with Ashutosh's very generous permission. --_Scott Aaronson_

* * *

**Guest Post by Ashutosh Jogalekar**

As some know, I was “fired” from Scientific American in 2014 for three “controversial” posts (among 200 that I had written for the magazine). When I parted from the magazine I chalked up my departure to an unfortunate misunderstanding more than anything else. I still respected some of the writers at the publication, and while I wore my separation as a badge of honor and in retrospect realized its liberating utility in enabling me to greatly expand my topical range, I occasionally still felt bad and wished things had gone differently.

No more. Now the magazine has done me a great favor by allowing me to wipe the slate of my conscience clean. What happened seven years ago was not just a misunderstanding but clearly one of many first warning signs of a calamitous slide into a decidedly unscientific, irrational and ideology-ridden universe of woke extremism. Its logical culmination two days ago was an absolutely shameless, confused, fact-free and purely ideological hit job on someone who wasn’t just a great childhood hero of mine but a leading light of science, literary achievement, humanism and biodiversity. While Ed (E. O.) Wilson’s memory was barely getting cemented only days after his death, the magazine published an op-ed calling him a racist, a hit job endorsed and cited by the editor-in-chief as “insightful”. One of the first things I did after reading the piece was buy a few Wilson books that weren't part of my collection.

Ed Wilson was one of the gentlest, most eloquent, most brilliant and most determined advocates for both human and natural preservation you could find. Under Southern charm lay hidden unyielding doggedness and immense stamina combined with a missionary zeal to communicate the wonders of science to both his fellow biologists and the general public. His autobiography, "Naturalist", is perhaps the finest, most literary statement of the scientific life I have read; it was one of a half dozen books that completely transported me when I read it in college. In book after book of wide-ranging intellectual treats threading through a stunning diversity of disciplines, he sent out clarion calls for saving the planet, for enabling dialogue between the natural and the social sciences, for understanding each other better. In the face of unprecedented challenges to our fragile environment and continued barriers to interdisciplinary communication, this is work that likely will make him go down in history as one of the most important human beings who ever lived, easily of the same caliber and achievement as John Muir or Thoreau. Even in terms of achievement strictly defined by accolades - the National Medal of Science, the Crafoord Prize which recognizes fields excluded by the Nobel Prize, and not just one but two Pulitzer Prizes - few scientists from any field in the 20th century can hold a candle to Ed Wilson. My friend Richard Rhodes who knew Wilson for decades as a close and much-admired friend said that there wasn't a racist bone in his body; Dick should know since he just came out with a first-rate biography of Wilson weeks before his passing.

The writer who wrote that train wreck is a professor of nursing at UCSF named Monica McLemore. That itself is a frightening fact and should tell everyone how much ignorance has spread itself in our highest institutions. She not only maligned and completely misrepresented Wilson but did not say a word about his decades-long, heroic effort to preserve the planet and our relationship with it; it was clear that she had little acquaintance with Wilson's words since she did not cite any. It's also worth noting the gaping moral blindness in her article which completely misses the most moral thing Wilson did - spend decades advocating for saving our planet and averting a catastrophe of extinction, climate change and divisiveness - and instead focuses completely on his non-existent immorality. This is a pattern that is consistently found among those urging "social justice" or "equity" or whatever else: somehow they seem to spend all their time talking about fictional, imagined immorality while missing the real, flesh-and-bones morality that is often the basis of someone's entire life's work.

In the end, the simple fact is that McLemore didn’t care about any of this. She didn’t care because she had a political agenda and the facts did not matter to her, even facts as basic as the definition of the normal distribution in statistics. For her, Wilson was some obscure white male scientist who was venerated, and that was reason enough for a supposed “takedown”. And the editor of _Scientific American_ supported and lauded this ignorant, ideology-driven tirade.

Ironically, Wilson would have found this ideological hit job all too familiar. After he wrote his famous book _[Sociobiology](https://www.amazon.com/Sociobiology-Synthesis-Edward-Wilson-ebook/dp/B00L9XW7Q2)_ in the 1970s, a volume in which, in a single chapter about human beings, he had the temerity to suggest that maybe, just maybe, human beings operate with the same mix of genes that other creatures do, the book was met by a disgraceful, below-the-belt, ideological response from Wilson’s far left colleagues Richard Lewontin and Stephen Jay Gould who hysterically compared his arguments to thinking that was well on its way down the slippery slope to that dark world where lay the Nazi gas chambers. The gas chamber analogy is about the only thing that’s missing from the recent hit job, but the depressing thing is that we are fighting the same battles in 2021 that Wilson fought forty years before, although turbocharged this time by armies of faithful zombies on social media. The sad thing is that Wilson is no longer around to defend himself, although I am not sure he would have bothered with a piece as shoddy as this one.

The complete intellectual destruction of a once-great science magazine is now clear as day. No more should _Scientific American_ be regarded as a vehicle for sober scientific views and liberal causes but as a political magazine with clearly stated ideological biases and an aversion to facts, an instrument of a blinkered woke political worldview that brooks no dissent. Scott Aaronson has taken a principled stand and said that after this proverbial last straw on the camel’s back, he will no longer write for the magazine or do interviews for them. I applaud Scott’s decision, and with his expertise it’s a decision that actually matters. As far as I am concerned, I now mix smoldering fury at the article with immense relief: the last seven years have clearly shown that leaving _Scientific American_ in 2014 was akin to leaving the Soviet Union in the 1930s just before Stalin appointed Lysenko head biologist. I could not have asked for a happier expulsion and now feel completely vindicated and free of any modicum of regret I might have felt.

To my few friends and colleagues who still write for the magazine and whose opinions I continue to respect, I really wish to ask: Why? Is writing for a magazine which has sacrificed facts and the liberal voice of real science at the altar of political ideology and make believe still worth it? What would it take for you to say no more? As Oscar Wilde would say, one mistake like this is a mistake, two seems more like carelessness; in the roster of the last few years, this is “mistake” 100+, signaling that it’s now officially approved policy. Do you think that being an insider will allow you to salvage the reputation of the magazine? If you think that way, you are no different from the one or two moderate Republicans who think they can still salvage the once-great party of Lincoln and Eisenhower. Both the GOP and _Scientific American_ are beyond redemption from where I stand. Get out, start your own magazine or join another, one which actually respects liberal, diverse voices and scientific facts; let us applaud you for it. You deserve better, the world deserves better. And Ed Wilson’s memory sure as hell deserves better.

* * *

**Update (from Scott):** [See here](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=29778348) for the Hacker News thread about this post. I was amused by the conjunction of two themes: (1) people who were uncomfortable with my and Ashutosh's expression of strong emotions, and (2) people who actually clicked through to the _SciAm_ hit-piece, and then reported back to the others that the strong emotions were completely, 100% justified in this case.
