---
title: "“The Chair”: A Straussian interpretation"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Tue, 31 Aug 2021"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=5777"
---

**[Warning: spoilers follow!]**

Last week Dana and I watched the full first season of [_The Chair_](https://www.netflix.com/title/81206259), the Netflix drama that stars Sandra Oh as Ji-Yoon Kim, incoming chairwoman of the English department at the fictional Pembroke University. As the rave reviews promised, I found the show to be brilliantly written and acted. At times, _The Chair_ made me think about that _other_ academia-centered sitcom, _[The Big Bang Theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Big_Bang_Theory)_ , which I freely confess I also enjoyed. But _The Chair_ is much more highbrow (and more political), it's about the humanities rather than STEM, and it's mostly about academics who are older than the ones in _Big Bang_ , both biologically and professionally.

I wouldn't call _The Chair_ "realistic": the sets, stuffed with imposing bookshelves, paintings of great scholars, etc., look like how a TV producer might imagine university buildings, rather than the relatively humdrum reality. But in less than three hours, the show tackles a staggering number of issues that will be recognizable and relevant to anyone in academia: cratering enrollments, a narrow-minded cost-cutting dean, a lack of free time and a desperate search for childcare, a tenure case that turns into a retention case, a woke scandal (about which more later), a faculty revolt against Ji-Yoon culminating in a vote of no confidence, and much more. There's also an elaborate side plot involving the actor (and real-life former literary scholar) David Duchovny, who portrays himself, being invited to lecture at Pembroke, which is _not_ the sort of thing most academics have experience with, but which I suppose many viewers will enjoy.

The show is written at a high enough level that its stumbles are those of a daring acrobat. In the main narrative arc of the first season, the writers set themselves an absurdly ambitious (and, I think, laudable) goal: namely, to dramatize a conflict between a free-spirited professor, and woke students trying to cancel that professor for a classroom "microaggression," in a way that fully empathizes with both sides. I don't know if the show actually succeeds at this, but that's partly because I don't know if it's _possible_ to succeed.

To start with some background: in Pembroke's English department, there are old, traditionalist white males, who give lectures extolling the Great Men of Literature, and who apparently still wield considerable power. Meanwhile, critical theorists are presented as young, exciting upstarts bravely challenging the status quo. People with recent experience of English departments should correct me if I'm wrong, but my sense is that this is pretty anachronistic--i.e., that the last powerful traditionalists in humanities departments were routed by the 80s or 90s at the latest, so that students in the Twitter-and-smartphone era (when _The Chair_ is set) would be about as likely to encounter them as they would professors sitting around in charcoal suits smoking pipes.

There were also some of what felt to me like … intersectional oversights? Ji-Yoon, being Korean-American, is repeatedly approached by Black female students and faculty as a "fellow woman of color," with whom they can commiserate about the entrenched power of the department's white males. The show never examines how woke discourse has increasingly reclassified Asian-Americans as "white-adjacent"--as, for example, in the battles over gifted and magnet programs or admissions to Harvard. Likewise, woke students are shown standing arm-in-arm with Pembroke's Jewish community, to denounce (what we in the audience know to be) a phantom antisemitic incident. Left unexplored is how, in the modern woke hierarchy, Jews have become just another kind of privileged white person (worse, of course, if they have ties to Israel).

This brings me to the first season's central conflict, which revolves around Bill Dobson, a handsome middle-aged white male professor who's revered as the department's greatest genius on the basis of his earlier work, but who, after the death of his wife, is now washed-up, flippant, and frequently drunk or high. In one class session, while lecturing about intellectuals who found the strength to resist fascism despite their own nihilistic impulses, Bill makes a Nazi salute and shouts "Heil Hitler!," as a theatrical reminder to the students about the enormity of what those intellectuals were fighting. Alas, a woke student captures that moment on their smartphone camera and shares it on social media. The clip of Bill making the Heil salute goes viral, shorn of all exculpatory context. Soon, crowds of students are waving placards and screaming "No Nazis at Pembroke!" outside the English building. In a desperate effort to make his PR crisis go away, the dean initiates termination proceedings against Bill--the principles of academic freedom and even Bill's tenure be damned. Ji-Yoon, of course, as Bill's chair, is caught smack in the middle of this. It's complicated even further by Ji-Yoon's and Bill's romantic feelings for each other, and further still by Bill's role as the babysitter of Ji-Yoon's adopted daughter.

As all of this unfolds, the show seems immensely interested in pinning the blame on Bill's "tragic flaws," minor though they seemed to me--mostly just pride and unseriousness. (E.g., trying to lampoon the absurd charge of Nazism, Bill offhandedly mentions that he's always wanted to visit Hitler's mountain retreat, and on another occasion belts out "Springtime for Hitler" from _[The Producers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Producers_\(1967_film\))_.) The woke students, by contrast, are portrayed as earnest, understandably upset, and legitimately terrified about hate crimes on campus. If they, too, have opportunistic motives to attack Bill, the show never examines them.

In one sentence, then, here's my beef with _The Chair_ : its script portrays a mob, step by step, destroying an innocent man's life over nothing, and yet it wants me to feel the mob's pain, and be disappointed in its victim for mulishly insisting on his innocence (even though he _is_ , in fact, innocent).

With real-life woke controversies, there often lingers the question of whether the accused _might really be_ a racist, fascist, sexual predator, or whatever else, adequate proof or no. What's different here is that we _know_ that Bill Dobson is none of those things, we _know_ he's decent to his core, because the writers have painstakingly shown us that. And yet, in a weird narrative pretzel, we're nevertheless supposed to be mad at him, and to sympathize with the campaign to cancel him.

A casual perusal of other reviews of _The Chair_ told me that these reactions were far from universal. [Here](https://www.google.com/search?q=the+chair+reviews&oq=the+chair+reviews&aqs=chrome.0.0i67i131i433j0i131i433i512l2j0i512l7.2011j0j4&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8), for example, is what one viewer wrote:

> I can appreciate that this is probably close to the reality that most women/of color experience in higher education. I enjoyed watching the scenes with Joan and Yaz [two female professors] the most but the rest was a drag. I couldn't understand why Ji-Yoon was into Bill, or why _anyone_ was into Bill. I found him to be an insufferable man-baby. That is such a turn off. So she'd put him straight but then still be pining for him. He wreaked [sic] of entitled, white male, tenured privilege and never showed any contrition for his actions or even awareness of their impact. i'm so tired of the "brilliant **_** " being used to justify coddling someone. And for the rest of the stuffy old patriarchal farts- boot them out! They weren't good teachers and weren't able to meet the needs of today's students.

I asked myself: _did this person watch the same show?_ It's like, the script couldn't possibly have been clearer about Bill's character, the fact that he's the polar opposite of the woke students' mental construct. And yet, if the show had drawn an unambiguous corollary from Bill's goodness--namely, that the effort to cancel him is a moral travesty--then _The Chair_ itself might have been denounced as conservative (or at least classical liberal) propaganda, and those who'd otherwise form its core viewership wouldn't have watched.

So, if I were a literary critic like the ones on the show, I might argue that _The Chair_ begs for a [Straussian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Persecution_and_the_Art_of_Writing) interpretation. Sure, there's an "overt" reading, wherein Bill Dobson is done in by his own hubris, or wherein it's a comedy of errors with no one to blame. But then there's also an "esoteric" reading, wherein Bill is the victim of an extremely specific modern-day collective insanity, one that future generations might look back on with little more ambivalence than we look back on McCarthyism. The writers of _The Chair_ might _hint_ at this latter reading, through their sympathetic portrayal of Bill and the obviousness of the injustice done to him, but they can never make it too explicit, because of the political and cultural constraints under which they themselves operate.

Under this theory, it presumably falls to those slightly outside the world portrayed in _The Chair_ --like, let's imagine, a theoretical computer science blogger who himself was denounced for woke heresies to the point where he has little more to lose in that direction--to make the esoteric reading explicit. Unless and until, of course, a second season comes along to undermine that reading entirely.
