---
title: "The International Olympiad in Injustice"
author: "Scott Aaronson"
date: "Thu, 26 Sep 2024"
source: "scottaaronson_blog"
url: "https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=8356"
---

Today is the day I became radicalized in my Jewish and Zionist identities.

Uhhh, you thought that had already happened? Like maybe in the aftermath of October 7, or well before then? Hahahaha no. You haven't seen nothin' yet.

See, a couple days ago, I was consoling myself on Facebook that, even as the arts and humanities and helping professions appeared to have fully descended into 1930s-style antisemitism, with "Zionists" (i.e., almost all Jews) now regularly getting [disinvited from conferences and panels](https://www.thefp.com/p/zionist-author-panel-albany-canceled-antisemitism), [singled out for condemnation by their teachers](https://president.columbia.edu/sites/default/files/content/Announcements/Report-2-Task-Force-on-Antisemitism.pdf), [placed on professional blacklists](https://www.thefp.com/p/campaign-to-blacklist-zionist-therapists), etc. etc.--still, at least we in math, CS, and physics have mostly resisted these insanities. This was my way of trying to contain the damage. Sure, I told myself, all sorts of walks of life that had long been loony got even loonier, but at least it won't directly affect _me_ , here in my little bubble of polynomial-time algorithms and lemmas and chalk and LaTeX and collegiality and sanity.

So immediately afterward, as if overhearing, the International Olympiad on Informatics [announced that](https://ioinformatics.org/news/ioi-response-to-the-conflict-in-gaza/52), by a vote of more than two-thirds of its delegates, it's banning the State of Israel from future competition. For context, the IOI is the world's main high-school programming contest. I once dreamed of competing in the IOI, but then I left high school at age 15, which is _totally the reason_ why I didn't make it. Incredibly, despite its tiny size, Israel [placed #2](https://www.reddit.com/r/Jewish/comments/1fh9bp1/israeli_team_takes_2nd_place_in_the_international/) in this month's contest, which was held in Egypt. (The Israeli teenagers had to compete remotely, since Egypt could not guarantee their safety.)

Anyway, [apparently](https://www.ynetnews.com/health_science/article/h1odpdzca) the argument that carried the day at IOI was that, since Russia had previously been banned, it was only fair to ban Israel too. Is it even worth pointing out that Russia launched a war of conquest and annihilation against a neighbor, while Israel has been _defending_ itself from such a war launched by its neighbors? I.e., that Israel is the "Ukraine" here, not the "Russia"? Do you even have to ask whether Syria, Iran, Saudi Arabia, or China were also banned? Will it change anyone's mind that, if we read Israel's enemies in their own words--as I do, every day--they constantly tell us that, in their view, Israel's fundamental "aggression" was not building settlements or demolishing houses or rigging pagers, but simply _existing_? ("We don't want no two states!," they explain. "We want all of '48," they explain.)

Surely, then, the anti-Zionists, the ones who rush to assure us they're _definitely_ not antisemites, must have some plan for what will happen to half the world's remaining Jews after the little Zionist lifeboat is gone, after the new river-to-the-sea state of Palestine has expelled the hated settler-colonialists? Surely the plan won't just be to ship the Jews back to the countries that murdered or expelled their grandparents, most of which have never offered to take them back? Surely the plan won't be the same plan from last time--i.e., the plan that the Palestinian leadership [enthusiastically supported](https://www.jpost.com/opinion/the-palestinians-must-acknowledge-their-role-in-the-holocaust-opinion-684753) the last time, the plan that it yearned to bring to Tel Aviv and Haifa, the plan called (where it was successfully carried out) by such euphemisms as [Umsiedlung nach dem Osten](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resettlement_to_the_East) and [Endlösung der Judenfrage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Final_Solution)?

I feel like there _must_ be sane answers to these questions, because if there aren't, then too many people around the globe have covered themselves in a kind of shame that I thought had died a generation before I was born. And, like, these are people who consider themselves the paragons of enlightened morality: weeping for the oppressed, marching for LGBTQ+, standing on the [right side of history](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=8234). They organize literary festivals and art shows and (god help me) even high-school programming contests. They couldn't also be monsters full of hatred, could they? Even though, the last time the question was tested, they totally were?

Let me add, in fairness: four Israeli high-school students will still be suffered to compete in the IOI, "but only as individuals." To my mind, then, the right play for those students is to show up next year, do as well as they did _this_ year, and then disqualify themselves by raising an Israeli flag in front of the cameras. Let them honor the legacy of Israel's Olympic athletes, who kept showing up to compete (and eventually, to win medals) even after the International Olympic Committee had made clear that it would not protect them from being massacred mid-event. Let them exemplify [what Mark Twain famously said](https://origin-rh.web.fordham.edu/Halsall/mod/1898twain-jews.asp) of "the Jew," that "he has made a marvellous fight in this world, in all the ages; and has done it with his hands tied behind him."

But why do I keep abusing your time with this, when you came to hear about quantum computing or AI safety? I'll get back to those soon enough. But truthfully, if speaking clearly about the darkness now re-enveloping civilization demanded it, I'd willingly lose every single non-Jewish friend I had, and most of my Jewish friends too. I'd completely isolate myself academically, professionally, and socially. I'd give up 99% of the readership of this blog. Better that than to look in the mirror and see a coward, a careerist, a [kapo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kapo).

I thank the fates or the Born Rule, then, that I won't need to do any of that. I've lived my life surrounded by friends and colleagues from Alabama and Alaska, China and India, Brazil and Iran, of every race and religion and sexual orientation and programming indentation style. Some of my Gentile friends 300% support me on this issue. Most of the rest are willing to hear me out, which is enough for friendship. If I can call the IOI's Judenboykott what it is while keeping _more than half_ of my readers, colleagues, and friends--that's not even much of a decision, is it?

* * *

**Important Update (September 26):** Jonathan Mosheiff, of Israeli's IOI delegation, got in touch with me and gave me permission to share the document below, which in my view shows that the anti-Israel animus at IOI goes much deeper than I realized, and that the process taken to remove Israel was fundamentally corrupt and in violation of the IOI's own promises. -SA

* * *

I served as the Israeli team leader at the International Olympiad in Informatics (IOI) from 2011 to 2015, and since then, I have maintained an unofficial advisory role to the team. Currently, I am an Assistant Professor in the Computer Science department at Ben-Gurion University.

There are two key issues that need to be addressed:

**Israel 's Participation in IOI 2024**

At IOI 2023, the Israeli delegation was informed by the Egyptian delegation that Israel would not be able to attend IOI 2024 as an official delegation under the Israeli flag. Instead, Israel could participate under a neutral "IOI flag," similar to how Russia participated in the 2021 Olympic Games in Tokyo. The Egyptians cited security concerns as the reason for this restriction, a claim that is highly questionable. The Israeli delegation inquired whether, after the IOI concluded, the official IOI scoreboard would reflect Israel’s representation under the Israeli flag rather than a neutral one. The Egyptian organizers responded that they would be unable to make this change, without providing any justification. This clearly undermines the credibility of their security-related reasoning.

In March 2024, Ben Burton, the IOI President from Australia, officially notified Israel that it would not be invited to participate in IOI 2024, not even under a neutral flag. This decision directly contravenes IOI rules, which mandate that the host nation must invite all IOI member countries. It’s important to differentiate between two scenarios: In some cases, a host country may invite another nation, but that nation cannot attend due to visa issues. However, this was not the situation here. Egypt did not issue Israel a letter of invitation and ignored Israel's attempts at communication. To my knowledge, this is only the second instance in IOI history where a host nation failed to invite another nation—the first being Iran's refusal to invite Israel when it hosted IOI 2017.

The IOI International Committee (the executive branch of the IOI) has not provided any explanation as to how the host nation could be allowed to act in this manner. They did propose a solution where Israel would participate remotely. Along with Israel, Iran also had to participate remotely due to visa issues, as did one German contestant. However, the treatment of Iran and Israel was vastly different. Iranian contestants (and the one German contestant) were acknowledged in all official on-site IOI publications and were recognized at both the opening and closing ceremonies. In contrast, Israel was completely ignored and went unrecognized throughout IOI 2024. The Israeli contestants were only "retroactively added" to the competition by the International Committee after IOI 2024 had concluded. Even now, our contestants cannot obtain official placement certificates, as the host nation deleted them from the competition servers. As far as I am aware, no other country in IOI history has been treated this way.

**The Vote to Sanction Israel**

In March 2024, the IOI President issued a brief statement indicating that there were requests to sanction Israel and that an email would be sent to all participating nations to gather their opinions. On August 3rd, 2024, a second email was sent, requesting that opinions be submitted directly to the International Committee rather than through a public discussion. In this email, Israel was already being compared to Russia. Israel submitted a position letter and requested that it be shared with all member nations, but the International Committee declined to disseminate Israel's position. The IOI President assured Israel that, should a vote on sanctions be held during IOI 2024, Israel would be allowed to participate in the discussion remotely and have its voice heard. On August 16th, the International Committee announced that such a vote would indeed take place, and that Israel would be included in both the discussion and the vote.

IOI 2024 began on September 1st, 2024. At that time, the Israeli delegation was informed that they would not be allowed to participate in the discussion, even remotely. Israel was permitted to submit a written statement, which would be made available for all team leaders to download, but it was never read aloud during any discussions. The reason given was that Israel had been effectively erased from IOI 2024 by the hosts, and the International Committee acquiesced to this. Meanwhile, the Egyptian and Palestinian delegations were actively lobbying for votes throughout the week of IOI 2024. The discussion and vote on sanctions took place on the final day of IOI 2024 during a meeting of the General Assembly (the legislative branch of the IOI, where each nation has one vote). Israel was not even permitted to listen to the discussion (our leaders managed to hear it only because a sympathetic team leader unofficially opened a Zoom channel for them), let alone speak. The discussion itself was problematic in many ways. For instance, it grouped Israel together with Russia and Belarus. Ultimately, a majority voted to sanction Israel, along with Russia and Belarus, which had already been sanctioned previously.
